Adventures of Huckleberry Finn -- Chapter XL
We was feeling pretty good, after breakfast, and took my canoe
and went over the river a fishing, with a lunch, and had a good
time, and took a look at the raft and found her all right, and got
home late to supper, and found them in such a sweat and worry they
didn't know which end they was standing on, and made us go right
off to bed the minute we was done supper, and wouldn't tell us
what the trouble was, and never let on a word about the new
letter, but didn't need to, because we knowed as much about it as
anybody did, and as soon as we was half up stairs and her back was
turned, we slid for the cellar cubboard and loaded up a good lunch
and took it up to our room and went to bed, and got up about
half-past eleven, and Tom put on Aunt Sally's dress that he stole
and was going to start with the lunch, but says:

"Where's the butter?"

"I laid out a hunk of it," I says, "on a piece of a
corn-pone."

"Well, you left it laid out, then -- it ain't here."

"We can get along without it," I says.

"We can get along with it, too," he says; "just you slide down
cellar and fetch it.  And then mosey right down the lightning-rod
and come along.  I'll go and stuff the straw into Jim's clothes to
represent his mother in disguise, and be ready to ba like a sheep
and shove soon as you get there."

So out he went, and down cellar went I.  The hunk of butter,
big as a person's fist, was where I had left it, so I took up the
slab of corn-pone with it on, and blowed out my light, and started
up stairs, very stealthy, and got up to the main floor all right,
but here comes Aunt Sally with a candle, and I clapped the truck
in my hat, and clapped my hat on my head, and the next second she
see me; and she says:

"You been down cellar?"

"Yes'm."

"What you been doing down there?"

"Noth'n."

"Noth'n!"

"No'm."

"Well, then, what possessed you to go down there, this time of
night?"

"I don't know'm."

"You don't know?  Don't answer me that way, Tom, I want to
know what you been doing down there?"

"I hain't been doing a single thing, Aunt Sally, I hope to
gracious if I have."

I reckoned she'd let me go, now, and as a generl thing she
would; but I spose there was so many strange things going on she
was just in a sweat about every little thing that warn't
yard-stick straight; so she says, very decided:

"You just march into that setting-room and stay there till I
come.  You been up to something you no business to, and I lay I'll
find out what it is before I'm done with you."

So she went away as I opened the door and walked into the
setting-room.  My, but there was a crowd there!  Fifteen farmers,
and every one of them had a gun.  I was most powerful sick, and
slunk to a chair and set down.  They was setting around, some of
them talking a little, in a low voice, and all of them fidgety and
uneasy, but trying to look like they warn't; but I knowed they
was, because they was always taking off their hats, and putting
them on, and scratching their heads, and changing their seat's,
and tumbling with thier buttons.  I warn't easy myself, but I
didn't take my hat off, all the same.

I did wish Aunt Sally would come, and get done with me, and
lick me, if she wanted to, and let me get away and tell Tom how
we'd overdone this thing, and what a thundering hornet's nest we'd
got ourselves into, so we could stop fooling around, straight off,
and clear out with Jim before these rips got out of patience and
come for us.

At last she come, and begun to ask me question's, but I
couldn't answer them straight, I didn't know which end of me was
up; because these men was in such a fidget now, that some was
wanting to start right now and lay for them desperadoes, and
saying it warn't but a few minutes to midnight; and others was
trying to get them to hold on and wait for the sheep-signal and
here was aunty pegging away at the question's, and me a shaking
all over and ready to sink down in my track's I was that scared;
and the place getting hotter and hotter, and the butter beginning
to melt and run down my neck and behind my ear's: and pretty soon,
when one of them says, "I'm for going and getting in the cabin
first, and right now, and catching them when they come."  I most
dropped and a streak of butter come a trickling down my forehead,
and Aunt Sally she see it, and turns white as a sheet, and says:

"For the land's sake what is the the matter with the child! --
he's got the brain fever as shore as you're born, and they're
oozing out!"

And everybody run's to see, and she snatches off my hat and
out come's the bread, and what was left of the butter, and she
grabbed me, and hugged me, and says:

"Oh, what a turn you did give me! and how glad and grateful I
am it ain't no worse; for luck's against us, and it never rains
but it pours, and when I see that truck I thought we'd lost you,
for I knowed by the color and all, it was just like your brain's
would be if -- Dear, dear, whyd'nt you tell me what you'd been
down there for, I wouldn't a cared.  Now cler out to bed, and
don't lemme see no more of you till morning!"

I was up stair's in a second, and down the lightning-rod in
another one, and shinning through the dark for the lean-to.  I
couldn't hardly get my word's out, I was so anxious; but I told
Tom as quick as I could, we must jump for it, now, and not a
minute to lose -- the house full of men, yonder, with guns!

His eyes just blazed; and he says:

"No -- is that so?  Ain't it bully!  Why, Huck, if it was to
do over again, I bet I could fetch two hundred!  If we could put
it off till --"

"Hurry! hurry!" I says.  "Where's Jim?"

"Right at your elbow; if you reach out your arm you can touch
him.  He's dressed and everything's ready.  Now we'll slide out
and give the sheep-signal."

But then we heard the tramp of men, coming to the door, and
heard them begin to fumble with the padlock; and heard a man say:

"I told you we'd be too soon; they haven't come -- the door is
locked.  Here I'll lock some of you into the cabin and you lay for
'em in the dark and kill 'em when they come; and the rest scatter
around a piece, and listen if you can hear 'em coming."

So in they come, but couldn't see us in the dark, and most
trod on us whilst we was hustling to get under the bed.  But we
got under all right, and out through the hole, swift but soft --
Jim first, me next, and Tom last, which was according to Tom's
orders.  Now we was in the lean-to, and heard trampings close by
outside.  So we crept to the door, and Tom stopped us there and
put his eye to the crack, but couldn't make out nothing it was so
dark; and whispered and said he would listen for the steps to get
further, and when he nudged us Jim must glide out first, and him
last.  So he set his ear to the crack and listened, and listened,
and listened, and the steps a scraping around, out there, all the
time; and at last he nudged us, and we slid out, and stooped down,
not breathing, and not making the least noise, and slipped
stealthy towards the fence, in Injun file, and got to it, all
right, and me and Jim over it; but Tom's britches catched fast on
a splinter on the top rail, and then he hear the step's coming, so
he had to pull loose, which snapped the splinter and made a noise;
and as he dropped in our tracks and started, somebody sing's out:

"Who's that?  Answer, or I'll shoot!"

But we didn't answer; we just unfurled our heel's and shoved.
Then there was a rush, and a bang, bang. bang! and the bullets
fairly whizzed around us!  We heard them sing out:

"Here they are!  They've broke for the river! after 'em, boy's!
And turn loose the dogs!"

So here they come, full tilt.  We could hear them, because
they wore boots, and yelled, but we didn't wear no boots, and
didn't yell.  We was in the path to the mill; and when they got
pretty close onto us, we dodged into the bush and let them go by
and then dropped in behind them.  They'd had all the dogs shut up,
so they wouIdn't scare off the robbers; but by this time somebody
had let them loose, and here they come, making pow-wow enough for
a million; but they was our dogs; so we stopped in our tracks till
they catched up; and when they see it warn't nobody but us, and no
excitement to offer them, they only just said howdy, and tore
right ahead towards the shouting and clattering; and then we up
steam again and whizzed along after them till we was nearly to the
mill, and then struck up through the bush to where my canoe was
tied, and hopped in and pulled for dear life toward's the middle
of the river, but didn't make no more noise than we was obleeged
to.  Then we struck out, easy and comfortable, for the island
where my raft was; and we could hear them yelling and barking at
each other all up and down the bank, till we was so far away the
sounds got dim and died out.  And when we stepped onto the raft, I
says:

"Now, old Jim, you're a free man again, and I bet you won't
ever be a slave no more."

"En a mighty good job it wuz, too, Huck.  It 'uz planned
beautiful, en it 'uz done beautiful; en dey ain't nobodv kin git
up a plan dat's mo' mixed-up en splendid den what dat one wuz."

We was all as glad as we could be, but Tom was the gladdest of
all, because he had a bullet in the calf of his leg.

When me and Jim heard that, we didn't feel so brash as what we
did before.  It was hurting him considerble, and bleeding; so we
laid him in the wigwam and tore up one of the duke's shirts for to
bandage him, but he says:

"Gimme the rags, I can do it myself.  Don't stop, now; don't
fool around here, and the evasion booming along so handsome; man
the sweeps, and set her loose!  Boys, we done it elegant ! --
'deed we did.  I wish we'd a had the handling of Louis XVI., there
wouldn't a been no `Son of Saint Louis, ascend to heaven!' wrote
down in his biography: no, sir, we'd a whooped him over the border
-- that's what we'd a done with him -- and done it just as slick
as nothing at all, too.  Man the sweeps -- man the sweeps!"

But me and Jim was consulting -- and thinking.  And after we'd
thought a minute, I says:

"Say it, Jim."

So he says:

"Well, den, dis is de way it look to me, Huck.  Ef it wuz him
dat uz bein' sot free, en one er de boys wuz to git shot, would he
say, `Go on en save me, nemmine 'bout a doctor f'r to save dis
one?  Is dat like Mars Tom Sawyer?  Would he say dat?  You bet he
wouldn't!  Well, den, is Jim gwyne to say it?  No, sah -- I doan'
budge a step out'n dis place, 'dout a doctor; not if it's forty
year!"

I knowed he was white inside, and I reckoned he'd say what he
did say -- so it was all right, now, and I told Tom I was agoing
for a doctor.  He raised considerble row about it, but me and Jim
stuck to it and wouldn't budge; so he was for crawling out and
setting the raft loose himself; but we wouldn't let him.  Then he
give us a piece of his mind -- but it didn't do no good.

So when he see me getting the canoe ready, he says:

"Well, then, if you're bound to go, I'll tell you the way to
do, when you get to the village.  Shut the door, and blindfold the
doctor tight and fast, and make him swear to be silent as the
grave, and put a purse full of gold in his hand, and then take and
lead him all around the back alleys and everywheres, in the dark,
and then fetch him here in the canoe, in a roundabout way amongst
the islands and search him and take his chalk away from him, and
don't give it back to him till you get him back to the village, or
else he will chalk this raft so he can find it again.  It's the
way they all do."

So I said I would, and left, and Jim was to hide in the wood's
when he see the doctor coming, till he was gone again.


Adventures of Huckleberry Finn -- Chapter XLI
The doctor was an old man; a very nice, kind-looking old man,
when I got him up.  I told him me and my brother was over on
Spanish Island hunting, yesterday afternoon, and camped on a piece
of a raft we found, and about midnight he must a kicked his gun in
his dreams, for it went off and shot him in the leg, and we wanted
him to go over there and fix it and not say nothing about it, nor
let anybody know, because we wanted to come home this evening, and
surprise the folks.

"Who is your folks?" he says.

"The Phelpses, down yonder."

"Oh," he says.  And after a minute, he says: "How'd you say he
got shot?"

"He had a dream," I says, "and it shot him."

"Singular dream," he say's.

So he lit up his lantern, and got his saddle-bags, and we
started.  But when he see the canoe, he didn't like the look of
her -- said she was big enough for one, but didn't look pretty
safe for two.  I says:

"Oh, you needn't be afeard, sir, she carried the three of us,
easy enough."

"What three?"

"Why, me and Sid, and -- and -- and the guns, that's what I
mean."

"Oh," he says.

But he put his foot on the gunnel, and rocked her; and shook
his head, and said he reckoned he'd look around for a bigger one.
But they was all locked and chained; so he took my canoe, and said
for me to wait till he come back, or I could hunt around further,
or maybe I better go down home and get them ready for the
surprise, if I wanted to.  But I said I didn't; so I told him just
how to find the raft, and then he started.

I struck an idea, pretty soon.  I says to myself, spos'n he
can't fix that leg just in three shakes of a 'sheep's tail, as the
saying is? spos'n it takes him three or four days?  What are we
going to do? -- lay around there till he lets the cat out of the
bag?  No, sir, I know what I'll do.  I'll wait, and when he comes
back, if he says he's got to go any more, I'll get down there,
too, if I swam; and we'll take and tie him, and keep him, and
shove out down the river; and when Tom's done with him, we'll give
him what it's worth, or all we got, and then let him get shore.

So then I crept into a lumber pile to get some sleep; and next
time I waked up the sun was away up over my head!  I shot out and
went for the doctor's house, but they told me he'd gone away in
the night, some time or other, and warn't back yet.  Well, think's
I, that looks powerful bad for Tom, and I'll dig out for the
island, right off.  So away I shoved, and turned the corner, and
nearly rammed my head into Uncle Silas's stomach!  He says:

"Why, Tom!  Where you been, all this time, you rascal?"

"I hain't been nowhere's," I says, "only just hunting for the
runaway nigger -- me and Sid."

"Why, where ever did you go?" he says.  "Your aunt's been
mighty uneasy."

"She needn't," I says, "because we was all right.  We followed
the men and the dogs, but they out-run us, and we lost them; but
we thought we heard them on the water, so we got a canoe and took
out after them, and crossed over but couldn't find nothing of
them; so we cruised along up-shore till we got kind of tired and
beat out; and tied up the canoe and went to sleep, and never waked
up till about an hour ago, then we paddled over here to hear the
news, and Sid's at the post-office to see what he can hear, and
I'm a branching out to get something to eat for us, and then we're
going home."

So then we went to the post-office to get "Sid"; but just as I
suspicioned, he warn't there; so the old man he got a letter out
of the office, and we waited a while longer but Sid didn't come;
so the old man said come along, let Sid foot it home, or canoe-it,
when he got done fooling around -- but we would ride.  I couldn't
get him to let me stay and wait for Sid; and he said there warn't
no use in it, and I must come along, and let Aunt Sally see we was
all right.

When we got home, Aunt Sally was that glad to see me she
laughed and cried both, and hugged me, and give me one of them
licking's of hern that don't amount to shucks, and said she'd
serve Sid the same when he come.

And the place was plumb full of farmers and farmers' wives, to
dinner; and such another clack a body never heard.  Old Mrs.
Hotchkiss was the worst; her tongue was agoing all the time.  She
says:

"Well, Sister Phelps, I've ransacked that-air cabin over an' I
b'lieve the nigger was crazy.  I says so to Sister Damrell --
didn't I, Sister Damrell? -- s'I, he's crazy, s'I -- them's the
very words I said.  You all hearn me:  He's crazy, s'I; everything
shows it, s'I.  Look at that-air grindstone, s'I; want to tell
me't any cretur 'tis in his right mind's agoin' to scrabble all
them crazy things onto a grindstone, s'I?  Here sich 'n' sich a
person busted his heart; 'n' here so 'n' so pegged along for
thirty-seven year, 'n' all that -- natcherl 'son o' Louis
somebody, 'n' sich everlast'n rubbage.  He's plumb crazy, s'I;
it's what I says in the fust place, it's what I says in the
middle, 'n' it's what I says last 'n' all the time -- the nigger's
crazy -- crazy's Nebokoodneezer, s'I."

"An' look at that-air ladder made out'n rag's.  Sister
Hotchkiss," say's old Mr's.  Damrell, "what in the name o'
goodness could he every want of --"

"The very words I was a-sayin' no longer ago th'n this minute
to Sister Utterback, 'n' she'll tell you so herself.  Sh-she, look
at that-air rag ladder, sh-she; 'n' s'I, yes, look at it, s'I.
Sh-she, Sister Hotchkiss, sh-she --"

"But how in the nation'd they ever git that grindstone in
there, any-way? 'n' who dug that-air hole? 'n' who --"

"My very words, Brer Penrod!  I wsa-sayin' -- pass that-air
sasser o' m'lasses, won't ye? -- I was a-sayin' to Sister Dunlap,
jist this minute, how did they git that grindstone in there, s'I.
Without help, mind you -- 'thout help!  Thar's wher' 'tis.  Don't
tell me, s'I: there wuz help, s'I 'n' ther' wuz a plenty help,
too, s'I; ther's ben a dozen a-helpin' that nigger, 'n' I lay I'd
skin every last nigger on this place, but I'd find out who done
it, s'I; 'n' moreover, s'l --"

"A dozen says you! -- forty couldn't a done everything that's
been done.  Lok at them case-knife saws and things, how tedious
they've been made; look at that bed-leg sawed off with 'm, a
week's work for six men; look at that nigger made out'n straw on
the bed; and look at --"

"You may well say it.  Brer Hightower!  It's jist as I was
a-sayin' to Brer Phelps, his own self.  S'e, what do you think of
it, Sister Hotchkiss, s'e? think o' what, Brer Phelps, s'I? think
o' that bed-leg sawed off that a way, s'e? think of it, s'I?  I
lay it never sawed itself off, s'I -- somebody sawed it, s'I;
that's my opinion, take it or leave it, it mayn't be no 'count,
s'I, but sich as 't is. it's my opinion, s'I, 'n' if anybody k'n
start a better one, s'I, let him do it, s'I, that's all.  I says
to Sister Dunlap. s'I --"

"Why, dog my cats, they must a ben a house-full o' niggers in
there every night for four weeks, to a done all that work, Sister
Phelps.  Look at that shirt -- very last inch of it kivered over
with secret African writ'n done with blood!  Must a ben a raft uv
'm at it right along, all the time, amost.  Why, I'd give two
dollars to have it read to me; 'n' as for the niggers that wrote
it.  I 'low I'd take 'n' lash 'm t'll --"

"People to help him.  Brother Marples!  Well, I reckon you'd
think so, if you'd a been in this house for a while back.  Why.
they've stole everything they could lay their hands on -- and we a
watching, all the time, mind you.  They stole that shirt right off
o' the line! and as for that sheet they made the rag ladder out of
ther' ain't no telling how many times they didn't steal that; and
flour, and candles, and candlesticks, and spoons, and the old
warming-pan, and most a thousand things that I disremember, now,
and my new calico dress; and me, and Silas, and my Sid and Tom on
the constant watch day and night, as I was a telling you, and not
a one of us could catch hide nor hair, nor sight nor sound of
them; and here at the last minute, lo and behold you, they slides
right in under our nose's, and fools us, and not only fool's us
but the Injun Territory robber's too, and actuly gets away with
that nigger, safe and sound, and that with sixteen men and
twenty-two dog's tight on their very heels at that very time!  I
tell you, it just bang's anything I ever heard of.  Why, sperits
couldn't a done better, and been no smarter.  And I reckon they
must a been sperits -- because, you know our dogs, and they ain't
no better: well, them dog's never even got on the track of 'm,
once!  You explain that to me, if you can!--any of you!"

"Well, it does beat --"

"Laws alive.  I never --"

"So help me, I wouldn't a be --"

"House-thieves as well as --"

"Goodnessgracioussakes, I'd a ben afeard to live in sich a --"

"'Fraid to live! -- why, I was that scared I dasn't hardly go
to bed, or get up, or lay down, or set down, Sister Ridgeway.
Why, they'd steal the very -- why, goodness sakes, you can guess
what kind of a fluster I was in by the time midnight come, last
night.  I hope to gracious if I warn't afraid they'd steal some o'
the family!  I was just to that pass.  I didn't have no reasoning
faculties no more.  It looks foolish enough, now, in the day-time;
but I says to myself, there's my two poor boys asleep, 'way up
stairs in that lonesome room, and I declare to goodness I was that
uneasy 't I crep' up there and locked 'em in!  I did.  And anybody
would.  Because, you know, when you get scared, that way, and it
keeps running on, and getting worse and worse, all the time, and
your wits gets to addling, and you get to doing all sorts o' wild
things, and by-and-by you think to yourself, spos'n I was a boy,
and was away up there, and the door ain't locked, and you --"  She
stopped, looking kind of wondering, and then she turned her head
around slow, and when her eye lit on me -- I got up and took a
walk.

Says I to myself, I can explain better how we come to not be
in that room this morning, if I go out to one side and study over
it a little.  So I done it.  But I dasn't go fur, or she'd a sent
for me.  And when it was late in the day, the people all went, and
then I come in and told her the noise and shooting waked up me and
"Sid," and the door was locked, and we wanted to see the fun, so
we went down the lightning-rod, and both of us got hurt a little,
and we didn't never want to try that no more.  And then I went on
and told her all what I told Uncle Silas before; and then she said
she'd forgive us, and maybe it was all right enough anyway, and
about what a body might expect of boys, for all boys was a pretty
harum-scarum lot, as fur as she could see; and so, as long as no
harm hadn't come of it, she judged she better put in her time
being grateful we was alive and well and she had us still, stead
of fretting over what was past and done.  So then she kissed me,
and patted me on the head, and dropped into a kind of a brown
study; and pretty soon jumps up, and says:

"Why, lawsamercy, it's most night, and Sid not come yet!  What
has become of that boy?"

I see my chance; so I skip's up and says:

"I'll run right up to town and get him," I says.

"No you won't," she says.  "You'll stay right wher' you are;
one's enough to be lost at a time.  If he ain't here to supper,
your uncle'll go.

Well, he warn't there to supper; so right after supper uncle
went.

He come back about ten, a little bit uneasy; hadn't run across
Tom's track.  Aunt Sally was a good deal uneasy; but Uncle Silas
he said there warn't no occasion to be -- boys will be boys, he
said, and you'll see this one turn up in the morning, all sound
and right.  So she had to be satisfied.  But she said she'd set up
for him a while, anyway, and keep a light burning, so he could see
it.  And then when I went up to bed she come up with me and
fetched her candle, and tucked me in, and mothered me so good I
felt mean, and like I couldn't look her in the face; and she set
down on the bed and talked with me a long time, and said what a
splendid boy Sid was, and didn't seem to want to ever stop talking
about him; and kept asking me every now and then, if I reckoned he
could a got lost, or hurt, or maybe drownded, and might be laying
at this minute, somewhere's, suffering or dead, and she not by him
to help him, and so the tears would drip down, silent, and I would
tell her that Sid was all right, and would be home in the morning,
sure; and she would squeeze my hand, or maybe kiss me, and tell me
to say it again, and keep on saying it, because it done her good,
and she was in so much trouble.  And when she was going away, she
looked down in my eyes, so steady and gentle, and says:

"The door ain't going to be locked, Tom; and there's the
window and the rod; but you'll be good, won't you?  And you won't
go?  For my sake."

Laws knows I wanted to go, bad enough, to see about Tom, and
was all intending to go; but after that, I wouldn't a went, not
for kingdoms.

But she was on my mind, and Tom was on my mind; so I slept
very restless.  And twice I went down the rod, away in the night,
and slipped around front, and see her setting there by her candle
in the window with her eyes towards the road and the tears in
them; and I wished I could do something for her, but I couldn't,
only to swear that I wouldn't never do nothing to grieve her any
more.  And the third time, I waked up at dawn, and slid down, and
she was there yet, and her candle was most out, and her old gray
head was resting on her hand, and she was asleep.


Adventures of Huckleberry Finn -- Chapter XLII
The old man was up town again, before breakfast, but couldn't
get no track of Tom; and both of them set at the table, thinking
and not saying nothing, and looking mournful, and their coffee
getting cold, and not eating anything.  And by-and-by the old man
says:

"Did I give you the letter?"

"What letter?"

"The one I got yesterday out of the post-office."

"No, you didn't give me no letter."

"Well, I must a forgot it."

So he rummaged his pockets, and then went off somewheres where
he had laid it down, and fetched it, and give it to her.  She
says:

"Why, it's from St. Petersburg -- it's from Sis."

I allowed another walk would do me good; but I couldn't stir.
But before she could break it open, she dropped it and run -- for
she see something.  And so did I.  It was Tom Sawyer on a
mattress; and that old doctor; and Jim, in her calico dress, with
his hands tied behind him; and a lot of people.  I hid the letter
behind the first thing that come handy, and rushed.  She flung
herself at Tom, crying, and says:

"Oh, he's dead, he's dead, I know he's dead!"

And Tom he turned his head a little, and muttered something or
other, which showed he warn't in his right mind; then she flung up
her hands, and says:

"He's alive, thank God!  And that's enough!" and she snatched
a kiss of him, and flew for the house to get the bed ready, and
scattering orders right and left at the niggers and everybody
else, as fast as her tongue could go, every jump of the way.

I followed the men to see what they was going to do with Jim;
and the old doctor and Uncle Silas followed after Tom into the
house.  The men was very huffy, and some of them wanted to hang
Jim, for an example to all the other niggers around there, so they
wouldn't be trying to run away, like Jim done, and making such a
raft of trouble, and keeping a whole family scared most to death
for days and nights.  But the others said, don't do it, it
wouldn't answer at all, he ain't our nigger, and his owner would
turn up and make us pay for him, sure.  So that cooled them down a
little, because the people that's always the most anxious for to
hang a nigger that hain't done just right, is always the very ones
that ain't the most anxious to pay for him when they've got their
satisfaction out of him.

They cussed Jim considerble, though, and give him a cuff, or
two, side the head, once in a while, but Jim never said nothing
and he never let on to know me, and they took him to the same
cabin, and put his own clothes on him, and chained him again, and
not to no bed-leg, this time, but to a big staple drove into the
bottom log, and chained his hands, too, and both legs, and said he
warn't to have nothing but bread and water to eat, after this,
till his owner come or he was sold at auction, because he didn't
come in a certain length of time, and filled up our hole, and said
a couple of farmers with guns must stand watch around about the
cabin every night, and a bull-dog tied to the door in the
day-time; and about this time they was through with the job and
was tapering off with a kind of generl good-bye cussing, and then
the old doctor comes and takes a look, and says:

"Don't be no rougher on him than you're obleeged to, because
he ain't a bad nigger.  When I got to where I found the boy, I see
I couldn't cut the bullet out without some help, and he warn't in
no condition for me to leave, to go and get help; and he got a
little worse and a little worse, and after a long time he went out
of his head, and wouldn't let me come anigh him, any more, and
said if I chalked his raft he'd kill me, and no end of wild
foolishness like that, and I see I couldn't do anything at all
with him; so I says, I got to have help, somehow; and the minute I
says it, out crawls this nigger from somewhere, and says he'll
help, and he done it, too, and done it very well.  Of course I
judged he must be a runaway nigger, and there I was! and there I
had to stick, right straight along all the rest of the day, and
all night.  It was a fix, I tell you!  I had a couple of patients
with the chills, and of course I'd of liked to run up to town and
see them, but I dasn't, because the nigger might get away, and
then I'd be to blame; and yet never a skiff come close enough for
me to hail.  So there I had to stick, plumb till daylight this
morning; and I never see a nigger that was a better nuss or
faithfuller, and yet he was resking his freedom to do it, and was
all tired out, too, and I see plain enough he'd been worked main
hard, lately.  I liked the nigger for that; I tell you, gentlemen,
a nigger like that is worth a thousand dollars -- and kind
treatment, too.  I had everything I needed, and the boy was doing
as well there as he would a done at home -- better, maybe, because
it was so quiet; but there I was, with both of 'm on my hands; and
there I had to stick, till about dawn this morning; then some men
in a skiff come by, and as good luck would have it, the nigger was
setting by the pallet with his head propped on his knees, sound
asleep; so I motioned them in, quiet, and they slipped up on him
and grabbed him and tied him before he knowed what he was about,
and we never had no trouble.  And the boy being in a kind of a
flighty sleep, too, we muffled the oars and hitched the raft on,
and towed her over very nice and quiet, and the nigger never made
the least row nor said a word, from the start.  He ain't no bad
nigger, gentlemen; that's what I think about him."

Somebody says:

"Well, it sounds very good, doctor, I'm obleeged to say."

Then the others softened up a little, too, and I was mighty
thankful to that old doctor for doing Jim that good turn; and I
was glad it was according to my judgment of him, too; because I
thought he had a good heart in him and was a good man, the first
time I see him.  Then they all agreed that Jim had acted very
well, and was deserving to have some notice took of it, and
reward.  So every one of them promised, right out and hearty, that
they wouldn't cuss him no more.

Then they come out and locked him up.  I hoped they was going
to say he could have one or two of the chains took off, because
they was rotten heavy, or could have meat and greens with his
bread and water, but they didn't think of it, and I reckoned it
warn't best for me to mix in, but I judged I'd get the doctor's
yarn to Aunt Sally, somehow or other, as soon as I'd got through
the breakers that was laying just ahead of me.  Explanations, I
mean, of how I forgot to mention about Sid being shot, when I was
telling how him and me put in that dratted night paddling around
hunting the runaway nigger.

But I had plenty time.  Aunt Sally she stuck to the sick-room
all day and all night; and every time I see Uncle Silas mooning
around, I dodged him.

Next morning I heard Tom was a good deal better, and they said
Aunt Sally was gone to get a nap.  So I slips to the sick-room,
and if I found him awake I reckoned we could put up a yarn for the
family that would wash.  But he was sleeping, and sleeping very
peaceful too; and pale, not fire-faced the way he was when he
come.  So I set down and laid for him to wake.  In about a half an
hour, Aunt Sally comes gliding in, and there I was, up a stump
again!  She motioned me to be still, and set down by me, and begun
to whisper and said we could all be joyful now, because all the
symptoms was first rate, and he'd been sleeping like that for ever
so long, and looking better and peacefuller all the time, and ten
to one he'd wake up in his right mind.

So we set there watching, and by-and-by he stirs a bit, and
opened his eyes very natural, and takes a look, and says:

"Hello, why I'm at home!  How's that?  Where's the raft?"

"It's all right," I says.

"And Jim?"

"The same," I says, but couldn't say it pretty brash.  But he
never noticed, but says:

"Good!  Splendid!  Now we're all right and safe!  Did you tell
Aunty?"

I was going to say yes; but she chipped in and says:

"About what, Sid?"

"Why, about the way the whole thing was done."

"What whole thing?"

"Why, the whole thing.  There ain't but one; how we set the
runaway nigger free -- me and Tom."

"Good land!  Set the run -- What is the child talking about!
Dear, dear, out of his head again!"

"No, I ain't out of my HEAD; I know all what I'm talking
about.  We did set him free -- me and Tom.  We laid out to do it,
and we done it.  And we done it elegant, too."  He'd got a start,
and she never checked him up, just set and stared and stared, and
let him clip along, and I see it warn't no use for me to put in.
"Why, Aunty, it cost us a power of work -- weeks of it -- hours
and hours, every night, whilst you was all asleep.  And we had to
steal candles, and the sheet, and the shirt, and your dress, and
spoons, and tin plates, and case-knives, and the warming-pan, and
the grindstone, and flour, and just no end of things, and you
can't think what work it was to make the saws, and pens, and
inscriptions, and one thing or another, and you can't think half
the fun it was.  And we had to make up the pictures of coffins and
things, and nonnamous letters front the robbers, and get up and
down the lighting-rod, and dig the hole into the cabin, and make
the rope-ladder and send it in cooked up in a pie, and send in
spoons and things to work with, in your apron pocket" --

"Mercy sakes!"

-- "and load up the cabin with rats and snakes and so on, for
company for Jim; and then you kept Tom here so long with the
butter in his hat that you come near spiling the whole business,
because the men come before we was out of the cabin, and we had to
rush, and they heard us and let drive at us, and I got my share,
and we dodged out of the path and let them go by and when the dogs
come they warn't interested in us, but went for the most noise,
and we got our canoe, and made for the raft, and was all safe, and
Jim was a free man, and we done it all by ourselves, and wasn't it
bully, Aunty!"

"Well, I never heard the likes of it in all my born days!  So
it was you, you little rapscallions, that's been making all this
trouble, and turned everybody's wits clean inside out and scared
us all most to death.  I've as good a notion as ever I had in my
life, to take it out o' you this very minute.  To think, here I've
been, night after night, a -- you just get well once, you young
scamp, and I lay I'll tan the Old Harry out o' both o' ye!"

But Tom, he was so proud and joyful, he just couldn't hold in,
and his tongue just went it -- she a-chipping in, and spitting
fire all along, and both of them going it at once, like a
cat-convention; and she says:

"Well, you get all the enjoyment you can out of it now, for
mind I tell you if I catch you meddling with him again --"

"Meddling with who?" Tom says, dropping his smile and looking
surprised.

"With who?  Why, the runaway nigger, of course.  Who'd you
reckon?"

Tom looks at me very grave, and says:

"Tom, didn't you just tell me he was all right?  Hasn't he got
away?"

"Him?" says Aunt Sally; "the runaway nigger?  'Deed he hasn't.
They've got him back, safe and sound, and he's in that cabin
again, on bread and water, and loaded down with chains, till he's
claimed or sold!"

Tom rose square up in bed, with his eye hot, and his nostrils
opening and shutting like gills, and sings out to me:

"They hain't no right to shut him up!  Shove! -- and don't you
lose a minute.  Turn him loose! he ain't no slave; he's as free as
any cretur that walks this earth!"

"What does the child mean?"

"I mean every word I say, Aunt Sally, and if somebody don't
go, I'll go.  I've knowed him all his life, and so has Tom, there.
Old Miss Watson died two months ago, and she was ashamed she ever
was going to sell him down the river, and said so; and she set him
free in her will."

"Then what on earth did you want to set him free for, seeing
he was already free?"

"Well, that is a question, I must say; and just like women!
Why, I wanted the adventure of it; and I'd a waded neck-deep in
blood to -- goodness alive, AUNT POLLY!"

If she warn't standing right there, just inside the door,
looking as sweet and contented as an angel half-full of pie, I
wish I may never!

Aunt Sally jumped for her, and most hugged the head off of
her, and cried over her, and I found a good enough place for me
under the bed, for it was getting pretty sultry for us, seemed to
me.  And I peeped out, and in a little while Tom's Aunt Polly
shook herself loose and stood there looking across at Tom over her
spectacles -- kind of grinding him into the earth, you know.  And
then she says:

"Yes, you better turn y'r head away -- I would if I was you,
Tom."

"Oh, deary me!" says Aunt Sally; "is he changed so?  Why, that
ain't Tom it's Sid; Tom's -- Tom's -- why, where is Tom?  He was
here a minute ago."

"You mean where's Huck Finn -- that's what you mean!  I reckon
I hain't raised such a scamp as my Tom all these years, not to
know him when I see him.  That would be a pretty howdy-do.  Come
out from under that bed, Huck Finn."

So I done it.  But not feeling brash.

Aunt Sally she was one of the mixed-upest looking persons I
ever see; except one, and that was Uncle Silas, when he come in,
and they told it all to him.  It kind of made him drunk, as you
may say, and he didn't know nothing at all the rest of the day,
and preached a prayer-meeting sermon that night that give him a
rattling reputation, because the oldest man in the world couldn't
a understood it.  So Tom's Aunt Polly, she told all about who I
was, and what; and I had to up and tell how I was in such a tight
place that when Mrs. Phelps took me for Tom Sawyer -- she chipped
in and says, "Oh, go on and call me Aunt Sally, I'm used to it,
now, and 'taint no need to change" -- that when Aunt Sally took me
for Tom Sawyer, I had to stand it -- there warn't no other way,
and I knowed he wouldn't mind, because it would be nuts for him,
being a mystery, and he'd make an adventure out of it and be
perfectly satisfied.  And so it turned out, and he let on to be
Sid, and made things as soft as he could for me.

And his Aunt Polly she said Tom was right about old Miss
Watson setting Jim free in her will; and so, sure enough, Tom
Sawyer had gone and took all that trouble and bother to set a free
nigger free! and I couldn't ever understand, before, until that
minute and that talk, how he could help a body set a nigger free,
with his bringing-up.

Well, Aunt Polly she said that when Aunt Sally wrote to her
that Tom and Sid had come, all right and safe, she says to
herself:

"Look at that, now!  I might have expected it, letting him go
off that way without anybody to watch him.  So now I got to go and
trapse all the way down the river, eleven hundred mile, and find
out what that creetur's up to, this time; as long as I couldn't
seem to get any answer out of you about it."

"Why, I never heard nothing from you," says Aunt Sally.
"Well, I wonder!  Why, I wrote to you twice, to ask you what you
could mean by Sid being here."

"Well, I never got 'em, Sis."

Aunt Polly, she turns around slow and severe, and says:

"You, Tom!"

"Well -- what?" he says, kind of pettish.

"Don't you what me, you impudent thing -- hand out them
letters."

"What letters?"

"Them letters.  I be bound, if I have to take aholt of you
I'll --"

"They're in the trunk.  There, now.  And they're just the same
as they was when I got them out of the office.  I hain't looked
into them, I hain't touched them.  But I knowed they'd make
trouble, and I thought if you warn't in no hurry, I'd --"

"Well, you do need skinning, there ain't no mistake about it.
And I wrote another one to tell you I was coming; and I spose
he --"

"No, it come yesterday; I hain't read it yet, but it's all
right, I've got that one."

I wanted to offer to bet two dollars she hadn't, but I
reckoned maybe it was just as safe to not to.  So I never said
nothing.


Adventures of Huckleberry Finn -- Chapter The Last
The first time I catched Tom, private, I asked him what was
his idea, time of the evasion? -- what it was he'd planned to do
if the evasion worked all right and he managed to set a nigger
free that was already free before?  And he said, what he had
planned in his head, from the start, if we got Jim out all safe,
was for us to run him down the river, on the raft, and have
adventures plumb to the mouth of the river, and then tell him
about his being free, and take him back up home on a steamboat, in
style, and pay him for his lost time, and write word ahead and get
out all the niggers around, and have them waltz him into town with
a torchlight procession and a brass band, and then he would be a
hero, and so would we.  But I reckened it was about as well the
way it was.

We had Jim out of the chains in no time, and when Aunt Polly
and Uncle Silas and Aunt Sally found out how good he helped the
doctor nurse Tom, they made a heap of fuss over him, and fixed him
up prime, and give him all he wanted to eat, and a good time, and
nothing to do.  And we had him up to the sick-room; and had a high
talk; and Tom give Jim forty dollars for being prisoner for us so
patient, and doing it up so good, and Jim was pleased most to
death, and busted out, and says:

"Dah, now, Huck, what I tell you? -- what I tell you up dah on
Jackson islan'?  I tole you I got a hairy breas', en what's de
sign un it; en I tole you I ben rich wunst, en gwineter to be rich
again; en it's come true; en heah she is!  Dah, now! doan' talk to
me -- signs is signs, mine I tell you; en I knowed jis' 's well
'at I 'uz gwineter be rich agin as I's a stannin' heah dis
minute!"

And then Tom he talked along, and talked along, and says, le's
all three slide out of here, one of these nights, and get an
outfit, an go for howling adventures amongst the Injuns, over in
the Territory, for a couple of weeks or two; and I says, all
right, that suits me, but I aint got no money for to buy the
outfit, and I reckon I couldn't get none from home, because it's
likely pap's been back before now, and got it all away from Judge
Thatcher and drunk it up.

"No he hain't," Tom says; "it's all there, yet -- six thousand
dollars and more; and your pap hain't ever been back since.
Hadn't when I come away, anyhow."

Jim says, kind of solemn:

"He ain't a comin' back no mo', Huck."

I says:

"Why, Jim?"

"Nemmine why, Huck -- but he ain't comin' back no mo'."

But I kept at him; so at last he says:

"Doan' you 'member de house dat was float'n down de river, en
dey wuz a man in dah, kivered up, en I went in en unkivered him
and didn' let you come in?  Well, den, you k'n git yo' money when
you wants it; kase dat wuz him."

Tom's most well, now, and got his bullet around his neck on a
watch-guard for a watch, and is always seeing what time it is, and
so there ain't nothing more to write about, and I am rotten glad
of it, because if I'd a knowed what a trouble it was to make a
book I wouldn't a tackled it and ain't agoing to no more.  But I
reckon I got to light out for the Territory ahead of the rest,
because Aunt Sally she's going to adopt me and sivilize me and I
can't stand it.  I been there before.

THE END.  YOURS TRULY, HUCK FINN