Adventures of Huckleberry Finn -- Chapter X
After breakfast I wanted to talk about the dead man and guess
out how he come to be killed, but Jim didn't want to.  He said it
would fetch bad luck; and besides, he said, he might come and
ha'nt us; he said a man that warn't buried was more likely to go
a-ha'nting around than one that was planted and comfortable.  That
sounded pretty reasonable, so I didn't say no more; but I couldn't
keep from studying over it and wishing I knowed who shot the man,
and what they done it for.

We rummaged the clothes we'd got, and found eight dollars in
silver sewed up in the lining of an old blanket overcoat.  Jim
said he reckoned the people in that house stole the coat, because
if they'd a knowed the money was there they wouldn't a left it.  I
said I reckoned they killed him, too; but Jim didn't want to talk
about that.  I says:

"Now you think it's bad luck; but what did you say when I
fetched in the snake-skin that I found on the top of the ridge day
before yesterday?  You said it was the worst bad luck in the world
to touch a snake-skin with my hands.  Well, here's your bad luck!
We've raked in all this truck and eight dollars besides.  I wish
we could have some bad luck like this every day, Jim."

"Never you mind, honey, never you mind.  Don't you git too
peart.  It's a-comin'.  Mind I tell you, it's a-comin'."

It did come, too.  It was a Tuesday that we had that talk.
Well, after dinner Friday, we was laying around in the grass at
the upper end of the ridge, and got out of tobacco.  I went to the
cavern to get some, and found a rattlesnake in there.  I killed
him, and curled him up on the foot of Jim's blanket, ever so
natural, thinking there'd be some fun when Jim found him there.
Well, by night I forgot all about the snake, and when Jim flung
himself down on the blanket while I struck a light, the snake's
mate was there, and bit him.

He jumped up yelling, and the first thing the light showed was
the varmit curled up and ready for another spring.  I laid him out
in a second with a stick, and Jim grabbed pap's whisky jug and
begun to pour it down.

He was barefooted, and the snake bit him right on the heel.
That all comes of my being such a fool as to not remember that
wherever you leave a dead snake its mate always comes there and
curls around it.  Jim told me to chop off the snake's head and
throw it away, and then skin the body and roast a piece of it.  I
done it, and he eat it and said it would help cure him.  He made
me take off the rattles and tie them around his wrist, too.  He
said that that would help.  Then I slid out quiet and throwed the
snakes clear away amongst the bushes; for I warn't going to let
Jim find out it was all my fault, not if I could help it.

Jim sucked and sucked at the jug, and now and then he got out
of his head and pitched around and yelled; but every time he come
to to himself he went to sucking at the jug again.  His foot
swelled up pretty big, and so did his leg; but by-and-by the drunk
begun to come, and so I judged he was all right; but I'd druther
been bit with a snake than pap's whisky.

Jim was laid-up for four days and nights.  Then the swelling
was all gone and he was around again.  I made up my mind I
wouldn't ever take aholt of a snake-skin again with my hands, now
that I see what had come of it.  Jim said he reckoned I would
believe him next time.  And he said that handling a snake-skin was
such awful bad luck that maybe we hadn't got to the end of it yet.
He said he druther see the new moon over his left shoulder as much
as a thousand times than take up a snake-skin in his hand.  Well,
I was getting to feel that way myself, though I've always reckoned
that looking at the new moon over your left shoulder is one of the
carelessest and foolishest things a body can do.  Old Hank Bunker
done it once, and bragged about it; and in less than two years he
got drunk and fell off of the shot tower and spread himself out so
that he was just a kind of a layer, as you may say; and they slid
him edgeways between two barn doors for a coffin, and buried him
so, so they say, but I didn't see it.  Pap told me.  But anyway,
it all come of looking at the moon that way, like a fool.

Well, the days went along, and the river went down between its
banks again; and about the first thing we done was to bait one of
the big hooks with a skinned rabbit and set it and catch a
cat-fish that was as big as a man, being six foot two inches long,
and weighed over two hundred pounds.  We couldn't handle him, of
course; he would a flung us into Illinois.  We just set there and
watched him rip and tear around till he drownded.  We found a
brass button in his stomach, and a round ball, and lots of
rubbage.  We split the ball open with the hatchet, and there was a
spool in it.  Jim said he'd had it there a long time, to coat it
over so and make a ball of it.  It was as big a fish as was ever
catched in the Mississippi, I reckon.  Jim said he hadn't ever
seen a bigger one.  He would a been worth a good deal over at the
village.  They peddle out such a fish as that by the pound in the
market house there; everybody buys some of him; his meat's as
white as snow and makes a good fry.

Next morning I said it was getting slow and dull, and I wanted
to get a stirring up, some way.  I said I reckoned I would slip
over the river and find out what was going on.  Jim liked that
notion; but he said I must go in the dark and look sharp.  Then he
studied it over and said, couldn't I put on some of them old
things and dress up like a girl?  That was a good notion, too.  So
we shortened up one of the calico gowns and I turned up my
trowser-legs to my knees and got into it.  Jim hitched it behind
with the hooks, and it was a fair fit.  I put on the sun-bonnet
and tied it under my chin, and then for a body to look in and see
my face was like looking down a joint of stove-pipe.  Jim said
nobody would know me, even in the daytime, hardly.  I practiced
around all day to get the hang of the things, and by-and-by I
could do pretty well in them, only Jim said I didn't walk like a
girl; and he said I must quit pulling up my gown to get at my
britches pocket.  I took notice, and done better.

I started up the Illinois shore in the canoe just after dark.

I started across to the town from a little below the ferry
landing, and the drift of the current fetched me in at the bottom
of the town.  I tied up and started along the bank.  There was a
light burning in a little shanty that hadn't been lived in for a
long time, and I wondered who had took up quarters there.  I
slipped up and peeped in at the window.  There was a woman about
forty year old in there, knitting by a candle that was on a pine
table.  I didn't know her face; she was a stranger, for you
couldn't start a face in that town that I didn't know.  Now this
was lucky, because I was weakening; I was getting afraid I had
come; people might know my voice and find me out.  But if this
woman had been in such a little town two days she could tell me
all I wanted to know; so I knocked at the door, and made up my
mind I wouldn't forget I was a girl.


Adventures of Huckleberry Finn -- Chapter XI
"Come in," says the woman, and I did.  She says:

"Take a cheer."

I done it.  She looked me all over with her little shiny eyes,
and says:

"What might your name be?"

"Sarah Williams."

"Where 'bouts do you live?  In this neighborhood?"

"No'm.  In Hookerville, seven miles below.  I've walked all
the way and I'm all tired out."

"Hungry, too, I reckon.  I'll find you something."

"No'm, I ain't hungry.  I was so hungry I had to stop two mile
below here at a farm; so I ain't hungry no more.  It's what makes
me so late.  My mother's down sick, and out of money and
everything, and I come to tell my uncle Abner Moore.  He lives at
the upper end of the town, she says.  I haint ever been here
before.  Do you know him?"

"No; but I don't know everybody yet.  I haven't lived here
quite two weeks.  It's a considerable ways to the upper end of the
town.  You better stay here all night.  Take off your bonnet."

"No," I says, "I'll rest a while, I reckon, and go on.  I
ain't afeared of the dark."

She said she wouldn't let me go by myself, but her husband
would be in by-and-by, maybe in a hour and a half, and she'd send
him along with me.  Then she got to talking about her husband, and
about her relations up the river, and her relations down the
river, and about how much better off they used to was, and how
they didn't know but they'd made a mistake coming to our town,
instead of letting well alone -- and so on and so on, till I was
afeard I had made a mistake coming to her to find out what was
going on in the town; but by-and-by she dropped onto pap and the
murder, and then I was pretty willing to let her clatter right
along.  She told about me and Tom Sawyer finding the six thousand
dollars (only she got it ten) and all about pap and what a hard
lot he was, and what a hard lot I was, and at last she got down to
where I was murdered.  I says:

"Who done it?  We've heard considerable about these goings on,
down in Hookerville, but we don't know who 'twas that killed Huck
Finn."

"Well, I reckon there's a right smart chance of people here
that'd like to know who killed him.  Some thinks old Finn done it
himself."

"No -- is that so?"

"Most everybody thought it at first.  He'll never know how
nigh he come to getting lynched.  But before night they changed
around and judged it was done by a runaway nigger named Jim."

"Why he --"

I stopped.  I reckoned I better keep still.  She run on, and
never noticed I had put in at all.

"The nigger run off the very night Huck Finn was killed.  So
there's a reward out for him -- three hundred dollars.  And
there's a reward out for old Finn too -- two hundred dollars.  You
see, he come to town the morning after the murder, and told about
it, and was out with 'em on the ferry-boat hunt, and right away
after he up and left.  Before night they wanted to lynch him, but
he was gone, you see.  Well, next day they found out the nigger
was gone; they found out he hadn't ben seen sence ten o'clock the
night the murder was done.  So then they put it on him, you see,
and while they was full of it, next day back comes old Finn and
went boo-hooing to Judge Thatcher to get money to hunt for the
nigger all over Illinois with.  The judge give him some, and that
evening he got drunk and was around till after midnight with a
couple of mighty hard looking strangers, and then went off with
them.  Well, he haint come back sence, and they ain't looking for
him back till this thing blows over a little, for people thinks
now that he killed his boy and fixed things so folks would think
robbers done it, and then he'd get Huck's money without having to
bother a long time with a lawsuit.  People do say he warn't any
too good to do it.  Oh, he's sly, I reckon.  If he don't come back
for a year, he'll be all right.  You can't prove anything on him,
you know; everything will be quieted down then, and he'll walk
into Huck's money as easy as nothing."

"Yes, I reckon so, 'm.  I don't see nothing in the way of it.
Has everybody quit thinking the nigger done it?"

"Oh, no, not everybody.  A good many thinks he done it.  But
they'll get the nigger pretty soon, now, and maybe they can scare
it out of him."

"Why, are they after him yet?"

"Well, you're innocent, ain't you!  Does three hundred dollars
lay round every day for people to pick up?  Some folks thinks the
nigger ain't far from here.  I'm one of them -- but I haint talked
it around.  A few days ago I was talking with an old couple that
lives next door in the log shanty, and they happened to say hardly
anybody ever goes to that island over yonder that they call
Jackson's Island.  Don't anybody live there? says I.  No, nobody,
says they.  I didn't say any more, but I done some thinking.  I
was pretty near certain I'd seen smoke over there, about the head
of the island, a day or two before that, so I says to myself like
as not that nigger's hiding over there; anyway, says I, it's worth
the trouble to give the place a hunt.  I hain't seen any smoke
sence, so I reckon maybe he's gone, if it was him; but husband's
going over to see -- him and another man.  He was gone up the
river; but he got back to-day and I told him as soon as he got
here two hours ago."

I had got so uneasy I couldn't set still.  I had to do
something with my hands; so I took up a needle off of the table
and went to threading it.  My hands shook, and I was making a bad
job of it.  When the woman stopped talking, I looked up, and she
was looking at me pretty curious, and smiling a little.  I put
down the needle and thread and let on to be interested -- and I
was, too--and says:

"Three hundred dollars is a power of money.  I wish my mother
could get it.  Is your husband going over there to-night?"

"Oh, yes.  He went up town with the man I was telling you of,
to get a boat and see if they could borrow another gun.  They'll
go over after midnight."

"Couldn't they see better if they was to wait till daytime?"

"Yes.  And couldn't the nigger see better, too?  After
midnight he'll likely be asleep, and they can slip around through
the woods and hunt up his camp fire all the better for the dark,
if he's got one."

"I didn't think of that."

The woman kept looking at me pretty curious, and I didn't feel
a bit comfortable.  Pretty soon she says:

"What did you say your name was, honey?"

"M--Mary Williams."

Somehow it didn't seem to me that I said it was Mary before,
so I didn't look up; seemed to me I said it was Sarah; so I felt
sort of cornered, and was afeared maybe I was looking it, too.  I
wished the woman would say something more; the longer she set
still, the uneasier I was.  But now she says:

"Honey, I thought you said it was Sarah when you first come
in?"

"Oh, yes'm, I did.  Sarah Mary Williams.  Sarah's my first
name.  Some calls me Sarah, some calls me Mary."

"Oh, that's the way of it?"

"Yes'm."

I was feeling better, then, but I wished I was out of there,
anyway.  I couldn't look up yet.

Well, the woman fell to talking about how hard times was, and
how poor they had to live, and how the rats was as free as if they
owned the place, and so forth, and so on, and then I got easy
again.  She was right about the rats.  You'd see one stick his
nose out of a hole in the corner every little while.  She said she
had to have things handy to throw at them when she was alone, or
they wouldn't give her no peace.  She showed me a bar of lead,
twisted up into a knot, and said she was a good shot with it
generly, but she'd wrenched her arm a day or two ago, and didn't
know whether she could throw true, now.  But she watched for a
chance, and directly she banged away at a rat, but she missed him
wide, and said "Ouch!" it hurt her arm so.  Then she told me to
try for the next one.  I wanted to be getting away before the old
man got back, but of course I didn't let on.  I got the thing, and
the first rat that showed his nose I let drive, and if he'd a
stayed where he was he'd a been a tolerable sick rat.  She said
that that was first-rate, and she reckoned I would hive the next
one.  She went and got the lump of lead and fetched it back and
brought along a hank of yarn, which she wanted me to help her
with.  I held up my two hands and she put the hank over them and
went on talking about her and her husband's matters.  But she
broke off to say:

"Keep your eye on the rats.  You better have the lead in your
lap, handy."

So she dropped the lump into my lap, just at that moment, and
I clapped my legs together on it and she went on talking.  But
only about a minute.  Then she took off the hank and looked me
straight in the face, but very pleasant, and says:

"Come, now -- what's your real name?"

"Wh-what, mum?"

"What's your real name?  Is it Bill, or Tom, or Bob? -- or
what is it?"

I reckon I shook like a leaf, and I didn't know hardly what to
do.  But I says:

"Please to don't poke fun at a poor girl like me, mum.  If I'm
in the way, here, I'll --"

"No, you won't.  Set down and stay where you are.  I ain't
going to hurt you, and I ain't going to tell on you, nuther.  You
just tell me your secret, and trust me.  I'll keep it; and what's
more, I'll help you.  So'll my old man, if you want him to.  You
see, you're a runaway 'prentice -- that's all.  It ain't anything.
There ain't any harm in it.  You've been treated bad, and you made
up your mind to cut.  Bless you, child, I wouldn't tell on you.
Tell me all about it, now -- that's a good boy."

So I said it wouldn't be no use to try to play it any longer,
and I would just make a clean breast and tell her everything, but
she mustn't go back on her promise.  Then I told her my father and
mother was dead, and the law had bound me out to a mean old farmer
in the country thirty mile back from the river, and he treated me
so bad I couldn't stand it no longer; he went away to be gone a
couple of days, and so I took my chance and stole some of his
daughter's old clothes, and cleared out, and I had been three
nights coming the thirty miles; I traveled nights, and hid
day-times and slept, and the bag of bread and meat I carried from
home lasted me all the way and I had a plenty.  I said I believed
my uncle Abner Moore would take care of me, and so that was why I
struck out for this town of Goshen."

"Goshen, child?  This ain't Goshen.  This is St. Petersburg.
Goshen's ten mile further up the river.  Who told you this was
Goshen?"

"Why, a man I met at day-break this morning, just as I was
going to turn into the woods for my regular sleep.  He told me
when the roads forked I must take the right hand, and five mile
would fetch me to Goshen."

"He was drunk I reckon.  He told you just exactly wrong."

"Well, he did act like he was drunk, but it ain't no matter
now.  I got to be moving along.  I'll fetch Goshen before
day-light."

"Hold on a minute.  I'll put you up a snack to eat.  You might
want it."

So she put me up a snack, and says:

"Say -- when a cow's laying down, which end of her gets up
first?  Answer up prompt, now -- don't stop to study over it.
Which end gets up first?"

"The hind end, mum."

"Well, then, a horse?"

"The for'rard end, mum."

"Which side of a tree does the most moss grow on?"

"North side."

"If fifteen cows is browsing on a hillside, how many of them
eats with their heads pointed the same direction?"

"The whole fifteen, mum."

"Well, I reckon you have lived in the country.  I thought
maybe you was trying to hocus me again.  What's your real name,
now?"

"George Peters, mum."

"Well, try to remember it George.  Don't forget and tell me
it's Elexander before you go, and then get out by saying it's
George-Elexander when I catch you.  And don't go about women in
that old calico.  You do a girl tolerable poor, but you might fool
men, maybe.  Bless you, child, when you set out to thread a
needle, don't hold the thread still and fetch the needle up to it;
hold the needle still and poke the thread at it -- that's the way
a woman most always does; but a man always does 'tother way.  And
when you throw at a rat or anything, hitch yourself up a tip-toe,
and fetch your hand up over your head as awkard as you can, and
miss your rat about six or seven foot.  Throw stiff-armed from the
shoulder, like there was a pivot there for it to turn on -- like a
girl; not from the wrist and elbow, with your arm out to one side,
like a boy.  And mind you, when a girl tries to catch anything in
her lap, she throws her knees apart; she don't clap them together,
the way you did when you catched the lump of lead.  Why, I spotted
you for a boy when you was threading the needle; and I contrived
the other things just to make certain.  Now trot along to your
uncle, Sarah Mary Williams George Elexander Peters, and if you get
into trouble you send word to Mrs. Judith Loftus, which is me, and
I'll do what I can to get you out of it.  Keep the river road, all
the way, and next time you tramp, take shoes and socks with you.
The river road's a rocky one, and your feet 'll be in a condition
when you get to Goshen, I reckon."

I went up the bank about fifty yards, and then I doubled on my
tracks and slipped back to where my canoe was, a good piece below
the house.  I jumped in and was off in a hurry.  I went up stream
far enough to make the head of the island, and then started
across.  I took off the sun-bonnet, for I didn't want no blinders
on, then.  When I was about the middle, I hear the clock begin to
strike; so I stops and listens; the sound come faint over the
water, but clear -- eleven.  When I struck the head of the island
I never waited to blow, though I was most winded, but I shoved
right into the timber where my old camp used to be, and started a
good fire there on a high-and-dry spot.

Then I jumped in the canoe and dug out for our place a mile
and a half below, as hard as I could go.  I landed, and slopped
through the timber and up the ridge and into the cavern.  There
Jim laid, sound asleep on the ground.  I roused him out and says:

"Git up and hump yourself, Jim!  There ain't a minute to lose.
They're after us!"

Jim never asked no questions, he never said a word; but the
way he worked for the next half an hour showed about how he was
scared.  By that time everything we had in the world was on our
raft and she was ready to be shoved out from the willow cove where
she was hid.  We put out the camp fire at the cavern the first
thing, and didn't show a candle outside after that.

I took the canoe out from shore a little piece and took a
look, but if there was a boat around I couldn't see it, for stars
and shadows ain't good to see by.  Then we got out the raft and
slipped along down in the shade, past the foot of the island dead
still, never saying a word.


Adventures of Huckleberry Finn -- Chapter XII
It must a been close onto one o'clock when we got below the
island at last, and the raft did seem to go mighty slow.  If a
boat was to come along, we was going to take to the canoe and
break for the Illinois shore; and it was well a boat didn't come,
for we hadn't ever thought to put the gun into the canoe, or a
fishing-line or anything to eat.  We was in ruther too much of a
sweat to think of so many things.  It warn't good judgment to put
everything on the raft.

If the men went to the island, I just expect they found the
camp fire I built, and watched it all night for Jim to come.
Anyways, they stayed away from us, and if my building the fire
never fooled them it warn't no fault of mine.  I played it as
low-down on them as I could.

When the first streak of day begun to show, we tied up to a
tow-head in a big bend on the Illinois side, and hacked off
cotton-wood branches with the hatchet and covered up the raft with
them so she looked like there had been a cave-in in the bank
there.  A tow-head is a sand-bar that has cotton-woods on it as
thick as harrow-teeth.

We had mountains on the Missouri shore and heavy timber on the
Illinois side, and the channel was down the Missouri shore at that
place, so we warn't afraid of anybody running across us.  We laid
there all day and watched the rafts and steamboats spin down the
Missouri shore, and up-bound steamboats fight the big river in the
middle.  I told Jim all about the time I had jabbering with that
woman; and Jim said she was a smart one, and if she was to start
after us herself she wouldn't set down and watch a camp fire --
no, sir, she'd fetch a dog.  Well, then, I said, why couldn't she
tell her husband to fetch a dog?  Jim said he bet she did think of
it by the time the men was ready to start, and he believed they
must a gone up town to get a dog and so they lost all that time,
or else we wouldn't be here on a tow-head sixteen or seventeen
mile below the village -- no, indeedy, we would be in that same
old town again.  So I said I didn't care what was the reason they
didn't get us, as long as they didn't.

When it was beginning to come on dark, we poked our heads out
of the cottonwood thicket and looked up, and down, and across;
nothing in sight; so Jim took up some of the top planks of the
raft and built a snug wigwam to get under in blazing weather and
rainy, and to keep the things dry.  Jim made a floor for the
wigwam, and raised it a foot or more above the level of the raft,
so now the blankets and all the traps was out of the reach of
steamboat waves.  Right in the middle of the wigwam we made a
layer of dirt about five or six inches deep with a frame around it
for to hold it to its place; this was to build a fire on in sloppy
weather or chilly; the wigwam would keep it from being seen.  We
made an extra steering oar, too, because one of the others might
get broke, on a snag or something.  We fixed up a short forked
stick to hang the old lantern on; because we must always light the
lantern whenever we see a steamboat coming down stream, to keep
from getting run over; but we wouldn't have to light it for
upstream boats unless we see we was in what they call a
"crossing;" for the river was pretty high yet, very low banks
being still a little under water; so up-bound boats didn't always
run the channel, but hunted easy water.

This second night we run between seven and eight hours, with a
current that was making over four mile an hour.  We catched fish,
and talked, and we took a swim now and then to keep off
sleepiness.  It was kind of solemn, drifting down the big still
river, laying on our backs looking up at the stars, and we didn't
ever feel like talking loud, and it warn't often that we laughed,
only a little kind of low chuckle.  We had mighty good weather, as
a general thing, and nothing ever happened to us at all, that
night, nor the next, nor the next.

Every night we passed towns, some of them away up on black
hillsides, nothing but just a shiny bed of lights not a house
could you see.  The fifth night we passed St. Louis, and it was
like the whole world lit up.  In St. Petersburg they used to say
there was twenty or thirty thousand people in St. Louis but I
never believed it till I see that wonderful spread of lights at
two o'clock that still night.  There warn't a sound there;
everybody was asleep.

Every night, now, I used to slip ashore, towards ten o'clock,
at some little village, and buy ten or fifteen cents' worth of
meal or bacon or other stuff to eat; and sometimes I lifted a
chicken that warn't roosting comfortable and took him along.  Pap
always said, take a chicken when you get a chance, because if you
don't want him yourself you can easy find somebody that does, and
a good deed ain't ever forgot.  I never see pap when he didn't
want the chicken himself, but that is what he used to say, anyway.

Mornings, before daylight, I slipped into corn fields and
borrowed a watermelon or a mush-melon, or a punkin, or some new
corn, or things of that kind.  Pap always said it warn't no harm
to borrow things, if you was meaning to pay them back, sometime;
but the widow said it warn't anything but a soft name for stealing
and no decent body would do it.  Jim said he reckoned the widow
was partly right and pap was partly right; so the best way would
be for us to pick out two or three things from the list and say we
wouldn't borrow them anymore -- then he reckoned it wouldn't be no
harm to borrow the others.  So we talked it over all one night,
drifting along down the river, trying to make up our minds whether
to drop the watermelons or the cantelopes, or the mushmelons or
what.  But towards daylight we got it all settled satisfactory and
concluded to drop crabapples and p'simmons.  We warn't feeling
just right, before that, but it was all comfortable now.  I was
glad the way it come out, too, because crabapples ain't ever good,
and the p'simmons wouldn't be ripe for two or three months yet.

We shot a water-fowl, now and then, that got up too early in
the morning or didn't go to bed early enough in the evening.  Take
it all around, we lived pretty high.

The fifth night below St. Louis we had a big storm after
midnight, with a power of thunder and lightning, and the rain
poured down in a solid sheet.  We stayed in the wigwam and let the
raft take care of itself.  When the lightning glared out we could
see a big straight river ahead, and high rocky bluffs on both
sides.  By-and-by says I, "Hel-lo, Jim, looky yonder!"  It was a
steamboat that had killed herself on a rock.  We was drifting
straight down for her.  The lightning showed her very distinct.
She was leaning over, with part of her upper deck above water, and
you could see every little chimbly-guy clean and clear, and a
chair by the big bell, with an old slouch hat hanging on the back
of it when the flashes come.

Well, it being away in the night, and stormy, and all so
mysterious-like, I felt just the way any other boy would a felt
when I see that wreck laying there so mournful and lonesome in the
middle of the river.  I wanted to get aboard of her and slink
around a little, and see what there was there.  So I says:

"Le's land on her, Jim."

But Jim was dead against it, at first.  He says:

"I doan' want to go fool'n 'long er no wrack.  We's doin'
blame' well, en we better let blame' well alone, as de good book
says.  Like as not dey's a watchman on dat wrack."

"Watchman your grandmother," I says; "there ain't nothing to
watch but the texas and the pilot-house; and do you reckon
anybody's going to resk his life for a texas and a pilot-house
such a night as this, when it's likely to break up and wash off
down the river any minute?"  Jim couldn't say nothing to that, so
he didn't try.  "And besides," I says, "we might borrow something
worth having, out of the captain's stateroom.  Seegars, I bet
you -- and cost five cents apiece, solid cash.  Steamboat captains
is always rich, and get sixty dollars a month, and they don't care
a cent what a thing costs, you know, long as they want it.  Stick
a candle in your pocket; I can't rest, Jim, till we give her a
rummaging.  Do you reckon Tom Sawyer would ever go by this thing?
Not for pie, he wouldn't.  He'd call it an adventure -- that's
what he'd call it; and he'd land on that wreck if it was his last
act.  And wouldn't he throw style into it? -- wouldn't he spread
himself, nor nothing?  Why, you'd think it was Christopher
C'lumbus discovering Kingdom-Come.  I wish Tom Sawyer was here."

Jim he grumbled a little, but give in.  He said we mustn't
talk any more than we could help, and then talk mighty low.  The
lightning showed us the wreck again, just in time, and we fetched
the starboard derrick, and made fast there.

The deck was high out, here.  We went sneaking down the slope
of it to labboard, in the dark, towards the texas, feeling our way
slow with our feet, and spreading our hands out to fend off the
guys, for it was so dark we couldn't see no sign of them.  Pretty
soon we struck the forward end of the skylight, and clumb onto it;
and the next step fetched us in front of the captain's door, which
was open, and by Jimminy, away down through the texas-hall we see
a light! and all in the same second we seem to hear low voices in
yonder!

Jim whispered and said he was feeling powerful sick, and told
me to come along.  I says, all right; and was going to start for
the raft; but just then I heard a voice wail out and say:

"Oh, please don't, boys; I swear I won't ever tell!"

Another voice said, pretty loud:

"It's a lie, Jim Turner.  You've acted this way before.  You
always want more'n your share of the truck, and you've always got
it, too, because you've swore 't if you didn't you'd tell.  But
this time you've said it jest one time too many.  You're the
meanest, treacherousest hound in this country."

By this time Jim was gone for the raft.  I was just a-biling
with curiosity; and I says to myself, Tom Sawyer wouldn't back out
now, and so I won't either; I'm agoing to see what's going on
here.  So I dropped on my hands and knees, in the little passage,
and crept aft in the dark, till there warn't but about one
stateroom betwixt me and the cross-hall of the texas.  Then, in
there I see a man stretched on the floor and tied hand and foot,
and two men standing over him, and one of them had a dim lantern
in his hand, and the other one had a pistol.  This one kept
pointing the pistol at the man's head on the floor and saying --

"I'd like to!  And I orter, too, a mean skunk!"

The man on the floor would shrivel up, and say:  "Oh, please
don't, Bill -- I haint ever goin' to tell."

And every time he said that, the man with the lantern would
laugh, and say:

"'Deed you ain't!  You never said no truer thing 'n that, you
bet you."  And once he said: "Hear him beg! and yit if we hadn't
got the best of him and tied him, he'd a killed us both.  And what
for?  Jist for noth'n.  Jist because we stood on our rights --
that's what for.  But I lay you ain't agoin' to threaten nobody
any more, Jim Turner.  Put up that pistol, Bill."

Bill says:

"I don't want to, Jake Packard.  I'm for killin' him -- and
didn't he kill old Hatfield jist the same way -- and don't he
deserve it?"

"But I don't want him killed, and I've got my reasons for it."

"Bless yo' heart for them words, Jake Packard!  I'll never
forgit you, long's I live!" says the man on the floor, sort of
blubbering.

Packard didn't take no notice of that, but hung up his lantern
on a nail, and started towards where I was, there in the dark, and
motioned Bill to come.  I crawfished as fast as I could, about two
yards, but the boat slanted so that I couldn't make very good
time; so to keep from getting run over and catched I crawled into
a stateroom on the upper side.  The man came a-pawing along in the
dark, and when Packard got to my stateroom, he says:

"Here -- come in here."

And in he come, and Bill after him.  But before they got in, I
was up in the upper berth, cornered, and sorry I come.  Then they
stood there, with their hands on the ledge of the berth, and
talked.  I couldn't see them, but I could tell where they was, by
the whisky they'd been having.  I was glad I didn't drink whisky;
but it wouldn't made much difference, anyway, because most of the
time they couldn't a treed me because I didn't breathe.  I was too
scared.  And besides, a body couldn't breathe, and hear such talk.
They talked low and earnest.  Bill wanted to kill Turner.  He
says:

"He's said he'll tell, and he will.  If we was to give both
our shares to him now, it wouldn't make no difference after the
row, and the way we've served him.  Shore's you're born, he'll
turn State's evidence; now you hear me.  I'm for putting him out
of his troubles."

"So'm I," says Packard, very quiet.

"Blame it, I'd sorter begun to think you wasn't.  Well, then,
that's all right.  Les' go and do it."

"Hold on a minute; I haint had my say yit.  You listen to me.
Shooting's good, but there's quieter ways if the thing's got to be
done.  But what I say, is this; it ain't good sense to go court'n
around after a halter, if you can git at what you're up to in some
way that's jist as good and at the same time don't bring you into
no resks.  Ain't that so?"

"You bet it is.  But how you goin' to manage it this time?"

"Well, my idea is this: we'll rustle around and gether up
whatever pickins we've overlooked in the staterooms, and shove for
shore and hide the truck.  Then we'll wait.  Now I say it ain't
agoin' to be more'n two hours befo' this wrack breaks up and
washes off down the river.  See?  He'll be drownded, and won't
have nobody to blame for it but his own self.  I reckon that's a
considerble sight better'n killin of him.  I'm unfavorable to
killin' a man as long as you can git around it; it ain't good
sense, it ain't good morals.  Ain't I right?"

"Yes -- I reck'n you are.  But s'pose she don't break up and
wash off?"

"Well, we can wait the two hours, anyway and see, can't we?"

"All right, then; come along."

So they started, and I lit out, all in a cold sweat, and
scrambled forward.  It was dark as pitch there; but I said in a
kind of a coarse whisper "Jim!" and he answered up, right at my
elbow, with a sort of a moan, and I says:

"Quick, Jim, it ain't no time for fooling around and moaning;
there's a gang of murderers in yonder, and if we don't hunt up
their boat and set her drifting down the river so these fellow's
can't get away from the wreck, there's one of 'em going to be in a
bad fix.  But if we find their boat we can put all of 'em in a bad
fix -- for the Sheriff'll get 'em.  Quick -- hurry!  I'll hunt the
labboard side, you hunt the stabboard.  You start at the raft,
and --"

"Oh, my lordy, lordy!  Raf'?  Dey ain' no raf' no mo', she done
broke loose en gone! -- 'en here we is!"


Adventures of Huckleberry Finn -- Chapter XIII
Well, I catched my breath and most fainted.  Shut up on a
wreck with such a gang as that!  But it warn't no time to be
sentimentering.  We'd got to find that boat, now -- had to have it
for ourselves.  So we went a-quaking and shaking down the
stabboard side, and slow work it was, too -- seemed a week before
we got to the stern.  No sign of a boat.  Jim said he didn't
believe he could go any further -- so scared he hadn't hardly any
strength left, he said.  But I said come on, if we get left on
this wreck, we are in a fix, sure.  So on we prowled, again.  We
struck for the stern of the texas, and found it, and then
scrabbled along forwards on the skylight hanging on from shutter
to shutter, for the edge of the skylight was in the water.  When
we got pretty close to the cross-hall door, there was the skiff,
sure enough!  I could just barely see her.  I felt ever so
thankful.  In another second I would a been aboard of her; but
just then the door opened.  One of the men stuck his head out,
only about a couple of foot from me, and I thought I was gone; but
he jerked it in again, and says:

"Heave that blame lantern out o' sight, Bill!"

He flung a bag of something into the boat, and then got in
himself, and set down.  It was Packard.  Then Bill he come out and
got in.  Packard says, in a low voice:

"All ready -- shove off!"

I couldn't hardly hang onto the shutters, I was so weak.  But
Bill says:

"Hold on -- 'd you go through him?"

"No.  Didn't you?"

"No.  So he's got his share o' the cash, yet."

"Well, then, come along -- no use to take truck and leave
money."

"Say -- won't he suspicion what we're up to?"

"Maybe he won't.  But we got to have it anyway.  Come along."

So they got out and went in.

The door slammed to, because it was on the careened side; and
in a half second I was in the boat, and Jim come a tumbling after
me.  I out with my knife and cut the rope, and away we went!

We didn't touch an oar, and we didn' speak nor whisper nor
hardly even breathe.  We went gliding swift along, dead silent,
past the tip of the paddlebox, and past the stern; then in a
second or two more we was a hundred yards below the wreck, and the
darkness soaked her up, every last sign of her, and we was safe,
and knowed it.

When we was three or four hundred yards down stream, we see
the lantern show like a little spark at the texas door, for a
second, and we knowed by that that the rascals had missed their
boat, and was beginning to understand that they was in just as
much trouble, now, as Jim Turner was.

Then Jim manned the oars, and we took out after our raft.  Now
was the first time that I begun to worry about the men -- I reckon
I hadn't had time to before.  I begun to think how dreadful it
was, even for murderers, to be in such a fix.  I says to myself,
there ain't no telling but I might come to be a murderer myself
yet, and then how would I like it?  So says I to Jim:

"The first light we see, we'll land a hundred yards below it
or above it, in a place where it's a good hiding-place for you and
the skiff, and then I'll go and fix up some kind of a yarn, and
get somebody to go for that gang and get them out of their scrape,
so they can be hung when their time comes."

But that idea was a failure; for pretty soon it begun to storm
again, and this time worse than ever.  The rain poured down, and
never a light showed; everybody in bed, I reckon.  We boomed along
down the river, watching for lights and watching for our raft.
After a long time the rain let up, but the clouds staid, and the
lightning kept whimpering, and by-and-by a flash showed us a black
thing ahead, floating, and we made for it.

It was the raft, and mighty glad was we to get aboard of it
again.  We seen a light, now, away down to the right, on shore.
So I said I would go for it.  The skiff was half full of plunder
which that gang had stole, there on the wreck.  We hustled it onto
the raft in a pile, and I told Jim to float along down, and show a
light when he judged he had gone about two mile, and keep it
burning till I come; then I manned my oars and shoved for the
light.  As I got down towards it, three or four more showed-up on
a hillside.  It was a village.  I closed in above the shore-light,
and laid on my oars and floated.  As I went by, I see it was a
lantern hanging on the jackstaff of a double-hull ferry-boat.  I
skimmed around for the watchman, a-wondering whereabouts he slept;
and by-and-by I found him roosting on the bitts, forward, with his
head down between his knees.  I give his shoulder two or three
little shoves, and begun to cry.

He stirred up, in a kind of a startlish way; but when he see
it was only me, he took a good gap and stretch, and then he says:

"Hello, what's up?  Don't cry, bub.  What's the trouble?"

I says:

"Papa and mam, and sis, and --"

Then I broke down.  He says:

"Oh, dang it, now, don't take on so, we all has to have our
troubles and this'n 'll come out all right.  What's the matter
with 'em?"

"They're -- they're -- are you the watchman of the boat?"

"Yes," he says, kind of pretty-well-satisfied like.  "I'm the
captain and the owner, and the mate, and the pilot, and watchman,
and head deck-hand; and sometimes I'm the freight and passengers.
I ain't as rich as old Jim Hornback, and I can't be so blame'
generous and good to Tom, Dick and Harry as what he is, and slam
around money the way he does; but I've told him a many a time 't I
wouldn't trade places with him; for, says I, a sailor's life's the
life for me, and I'm derned if I'd live two mile out o' town,
where there ain't nothing ever goin' on, not for all his
spondulicks and as much more on top of it.  Says I --"

I broke in and says:

"They're in an awful peck of trouble, and --"

"Who is?"

"Why, pap and mam, arid sis, and Miss Hooker; and if you'd
take your ferry-boat and go up there --"

"Up where?  Where are they?"

"On the wreck."

"What wreck?"

"Why, there ain't but one."

"What, you don't mean the Walter Scott?"

"Yes."

"Good land! what are they doin' there, for gracious sakes?"

"Well, they didn't go there a-purpose."

"I bet they didn't!  Why, great goodness, there ain't no
chance for 'em if they don't git off mighty quick!  Why, how in
the nation did they ever git into such a scrape?"

"Easy enough.  Miss Hooker was a-visiting, up there to the
town --"

"Yes, Booth's Landing -- go on."

"She was a-visiting, there at Booth's Landing, and just in the
edge of the evening she started over with her nigger woman in the
horse-ferry, to stay all night at her friend's house, Miss
What-you-may-call-her, I disremember her name, and they lost their
steering-oar, and swung around and went a-floating down,
stern-first, about two mile, and saddle-baggsed on the wreck, and
the ferry man and the nigger woman and the horses was all lost,
but Miss Hooker she made a grab and got aboard the wreck.  Well,
about an hour after dark, we come along down in our trading-scow,
and it was so dark we didn't notice the wreck till we was right on
it; and so we saddle-baggsed; but all of us was saved but Bill
Whipple -- and oh, he was the best cretur! -- I most wish't it had
been me, I do."

"My George!  It's the beatenest thing I ever struck.  And then
what did you all do."

"Well, we hollered and took on, but it's so wide there, we
couldn't make nobody hear.  So pap said somebody got to get ashore
and get help somehow.  I was the only one that could swim, so I
made a dash for it, and Miss Hooker she said if I didn't strike
help sooner, come here and hunt up her uncle, and he'd fix the
thing.  I made the land about a mile below, and been fooling along
ever since, trying to get people to do something, but they said,
`What, in such a night and such a current? there ain't no sense in
it; go for the steam-ferry.'  Now if you'll go, and --"

"By Jackson, I'd like to, and blame it I don't know but I
will; but who is the dingnation's agoin' to pay for it?  Do you
reckon your pap --"

"Why that's all right.  Miss Hooker she told me, particular,
that her uncle Hornback --"

"Great guns! is he her uncle?  Looky here, you break for that
light over yonder-way and turn out west when you git there, and
about a quarter of a mile out you'll come to the tavern; tell 'em
to dart you out to Jim Hornback's and he'll foot the bill.  And
don't you fool around any, because he'll want to know the news.
Tell him I'll have his niece all safe before he can get to town.
Hump yourself, now; I'm agoing up around the corner here, to roust
out my engineer."

I struck for the light, but as soon as he turned the corner I
went back and got into my skiff and bailed her out and then pulled
up shore in the easy water about six hundred yards, and tucked
myself in among some woodboats; for I couldn't rest easy till I
could see the ferry-boat start.  But take it all around, I was
feeling ruther comfortable on accounts of taking all this trouble
for that gang, for not many would a done it.  I wished the widow
knowed about it.  I judged she would be proud of me for helping
these rapscallions because rapscallions and dead beats is the kind
the widow and good people takes the most interest in.

Well, before long, here comes the wreck, dim and dusky,
sliding along down!  A kind of cold shiver went through me, and
then I struck out for her.  She was very deep, and I see in a
minute there warn't much chance for anybody being alive in her.  I
pulled all around her and hollered a little, but there wasn't any
answer; all dead still.  I felt a little bit heavy-hearted about
the gang, but not much, for I reckoned if they could stand it, I
could.

Then here comes the ferry-boat; so I shoved for the middle of
the river on a long down-stream slant; and when I judged I was out
of eye-reach, I laid on my oars, and looked back and see her go
and smell around the wreck for Miss Hooker's remainders, because
the captain would know her uncle Hornback would want them; and
then pretty soon the ferry-boat give it up and went for shore, and
I laid into my work and went a-booming down the river.

It did seem a powerful long time before Jim's light showed up;
and when it did show, it looked like it was a thousand mile off.
By the time I got there the sky was beginning to get a little gray
in the east; so we struck for an island, and hid the raft, and
sunk the skiff, and turned in and slept like dead people.


Adventures of Huckleberry Finn -- Chapter XIV
By-and-by, when we got up we turned over the truck the gang
had stole off of the wreck, and found boots, and blankets, and
clothes, and all sorts of other things, and a lot of books, and a
spyglass, and three boxes of seegars.  We hadn't ever been this
rich before, in neither of our lives.  The seegars was prime.  We
laid off all the afternoon in the woods talking, and me reading
the books, and having a general good time.  I told Jim all about
what happened inside the wreck, and at the ferry-boat; and I said
these kinds of things was adventures; but he said he didn't want
no more adventures.  He said that when I went in the texas and he
crawled back to get on the raft and found her gone, he nearly
died; because he judged it was all up with him, anyway it could be
fixed; for if he didn't get saved he would get drownded; and if he
did get saved, whoever saved him would send him back home so as to
get the reward, and then Miss Watson would sell him South, sure.
Well, he was right; he was most always right; he had an uncommon
level head, for a nigger.

I read considerable to Jim about kings, and dukes, and earls,
and such, and how gaudy they dressed, and how much style they put
on, and called each other your majesty, and your grace, and your
lordship, and so on, 'stead of mister; and Jim's eyes bugged out,
and he was interested.  He says:

"I didn' know dey was so many un um.  I hain't hearn 'bout
none un um, skasely, but ole King Sollermun, onless you counts dem
kings dat's in a pack er k'yards.  How much do a king git?"

"Get?" I says; "why, they get a thousand dollars a month if
they want it; they can have just as much as they want; everything
belongs to them."

"Ain' dat gay?  En what dey got to do, Huck?"

"They don't do nothing!  Why how you talk.  They just set
around."

"No -- is dat so?"

"Of course it is.  They just set around.  Except maybe when
there's a war; then they go to the war.  But other times they just
lazy around; or go hawking -- just hawking and sp-- Sh! -- d' you
hear a noise?"

We skipped out and looked; but it warn't nothing but the
flutter of a steamboat's wheel, away down coming around the point;
so we come back.

"Yes," says I, "and other times, when things is dull, they
fuss with the parlyment; and if everybody don't go just so he
whacks their heads off.  But mostly they hang round the harem."

"Roun' de which?"

"Harem."

"What's de harem?"

"The place where he keep his wives.  Don't you know about the
harem?  Solomon had one; he had about a million wives."

"Why, yes, dat's so; I -- I'd done forgot it.  A harem's a
bo'd'n-house, I reck'n.  Mos' likely dey has rackety times in de
nussery.  En I reck'n de wives quarrels considable; en dat 'crease
de racket.  Yit dey say Sollermun de wises' man dat ever live'.  I
doan' take no stock in dat.  Bekase why: would a wise man want to
live in de mids' er sich a blimblammin' all de time?  No -- 'deed
he wouldn't.  A wise man 'ud take en buil' a biler-factry; en den
he could shet down de biler-factry when he want to res'."

"Well, but he was the wisest man, anyway; because the widow
she told me so, her own self."

"I doan k'yer what de widder say, he warn't no wise man,
nuther.  He had some er de dad-fetchedes' ways I ever see.  Does
you know 'bout dat chile dat he 'uz gwyne to chop in two?"

"Yes, the widow told me all about it."

"Well, den!  Warn' dat de beatenes' notion in de worl'?  You
jes' take en look at it a minute.  Dah's de stump, dah -- dat's
one er de women; heah's you -- at's de yuther one; I's Sollermun;
en dish-yer dollar bill's de chile.  Bofe un you claims it.  What
does I do?  Does I shin aroun' mongs' de neighbors en fine out
which un you de bill do b'long to, en han' it over to de right
one, all safe en soun', de way dat anybody dat had any gumption
would?  No -- I take en whack de bill in two, en give half un it
to you, en de yuther half to de yuther woman.  Dat's de way
Sollermun was gwyne to do wid de chile.  Now I want to ast you:
what's de use er dat half a bill? -- can't buy noth'n wid it.  En
what use is a halfa chile?  I would'n give a dern for a million un
um."

"But hang it, Jim, you've clean missed the point -- blame it,
you've missed it a thousand mile."

"Who?  Me?  Go 'long.  Doan' talk to me 'bout yo' pints.  I
reck'n I knows sense when I sees it; en dey ain' no sense in sich
doin's as dat.  De 'spute warn't 'bout a half a chile, de 'spute
was 'bout a whole chile; en de man dat think he kin settle a
'spute 'bout a whole chile wid a halfa chile, doan' know enough to
come in out'n de rain.  Doan' talk to me 'bout Sollermun, Huck, I
knows him by de back."

"But I tell you you don't get the point."

"Blame de pint!  I reck'n I knows what I knows.  En mine you,
de real pint is down furder -- it's down deeper.  It lays in de
way Sollermun was raised.  You take a man dat's got on'y one er
two chillen; is dat man gwyne to be waseful o' chillen?  No, he
ain't; he can't 'ford it.  He know how to value 'em.  But you take
a man dat's got 'bout five million chillen runnin' roun' de house,
en it's diffunt.  He as soon chop a chile in two as a cat.  Dey's
plenty mo'.  A chile er two, mo' er less, warn't no consekens to
Sollermun, dad fetch him!"

I never see such a nigger.  If he got a notion in his head
once, there warn't no getting it out again.  He was the most down
on Solomon of any nigger I ever see.  So I went to talking about
other kings, and let Solomon slide.  I told about Louis Sixteenth
that got his head cut off in France long time age; and about his
little boy the dolphin that would a been a king, but they took and
shut him up in jail, and some say he died there.

"Po' little chap."

"But some says he got out and got away, and come to America."

"Dat's good!  But he'll be pooty lonesome -- dey ain' no kings
here, is dey, Huck?"

"No."

"Den he cain't git no situation.  What he gwyne to do?"

"Well, I don't know.  Some of them gets on the police, and
some of them learns people how to talk French."

"Why, Huck, doan' de French people talk de same way we does?"

"No, Jim; you couldn't understand aword they said -- not a
single word."

"Well, now, I be ding-busted!  How do dat come?"

"I don't know; but it's so.  I got some of their jabber out of
a book.  Spose a man was to come to you and say polly-voo-franzy
-- what would you think?"

"I wouldn' think nutf'n; I'd take en bust him over de head.
Dat is, if he warn't white.  I wouldn't 'low no nigger to call me
dat."

"Shucks, it ain't calling you anything.  It's only saying do
you know how to talk French."

"Well, den, why couldn't he say it?"

"Why, he is a-saying it.  That's a Frenchman's way of saying
it."

"Well, it's a blame' ridicklous way, en I doan' want to hear
no mo' 'bout it.  Dey ain' no sense in it."

"Looky here, Jim; does a cat talk like we do?"

"No, a cat don't."

"Well, does a cow?"

"No, a cow don't, nuther."

"Does a cat talk like a cow, or a cow talk like a cat?"

"No, dey don't."

"It's natural and right for 'em to talk different from each
other, ain't it?"

"Course."

"And ain't it natural and right for a cat and a cow to talk
different from us?"

"Why, mos' sholy it is."

"Well, then, why ain't it natural and right for a Frenchman to
talk different from us?  You answer me that."

"Is a cat a man, Huck?"

"No."

"Well, den, dey ain't no sense in a cat talkin' like a man.
Is a cow a man? -- er is a cow a cat?"

"No, she ain't either of them."

"Well, den, she ain' got no business to talk like either one
er the yuther of 'em.  Is a Frenchman a man?"

"Yes."

"Well, den!  Dad blame it, why doan' he talk like a man?  You
answer me da!!"

I see it warn't no use wasting words -- you can't learn a
nigger to argue.  So I quit.


Adventures of Huckleberry Finn -- Chapter XV
We judged that three nights more would fetch us to Cairo, at
the bottom of Illinois, where the Ohio River comes in, and that
was what we was after.  We would sell the raft and get on a
steamboat and go way up the Ohio amongst the free States, and then
be out of trouble.

Well, the second night a fog begun to come on, and we made for
a tow-head to tie to, for it wouldn't do to try to run in fog; but
when I paddled ahead in the canoe, with the line, to make fast,
there warn't anything but little saplings to tie to.  I passed the
line around one of them right on the edge of the cut bank, but
there was a stiff current, and the raft come booming down so
lively she tore it out by the roots and away she went.  I see the
fog closing down, and it made me so sick and scared I couldn't
budge for most a half a minute it seemed to me -- and then there
warn't no raft in sight; you couldn't see twenty yards.  I jumped
into the canoe and run back to the stern and grabbed the paddle
and set her back a stroke.

But she didn't come.  I was in such a hurry I hadn't untied
her.  I got up and tried to untie her, but I was so excited my
hands shook so I couldn't hardly do anything with them.

As soon as I got started I took out after the raft, hot and
heavy, right down the tow-head.  That was all right as far as it
went, but the tow-head warn't sixty yards long, and the minute I
flew by the foot of it I shot out into the solid white fog, and
hadn't no more idea which way I was going than a dead man.

Thinks I, it won't do to paddle; first I know I'll run into
the bank or a tow-head or something; I got to set still and float,
and yet it's mighty fidgety business to have to hold your hands
still at such a time.  I whooped and listened.  Away down there,
somewheres, I hears a small whoop, and up comes my spirits.  I
went tearing after it, listening sharp to hear it again.  The next
time it come, I see I warn't heading for it but heading away to
the right of it.  And the next time, I was heading away to the
left of it -- and not gaining on it much, either, for I was flying
around, this way and that and 'tother, but it was going straight
ahead all the time.

I did wish the fool would think to beat a tin pan, and beat it
all the time, but he never did, and it was the still places
between the whoops that was making the trouble for me.  Well, I
fought along, and directly I hears the whoop behind me.  I was
tangled good, now.  That was somebody else's whoop, or else I was
turned around.

I throwed the paddle down.  I heard the whoop again; it was
behind me yet, but in a difterent place; it kept coming, and kept
changing its place, and I kept answering, till by-and-by it was in
front of me again and I knowed the current had swung the canoe's
head down stream and I was all right, if that was Jim and not some
other raftsman hollering.  I couldn't tell nothing about voices in
a fog; for nothing don't look natural nor sound natural in a fog.

The whooping went on, and in about a minute I come a booming
down on a cut bank with smoky ghosts of big trees on it, and the
current throwed me off to the left and shot by, amongst a lot of
snags that fairly roared, the current was tearing by them so
swift.

In another second or two it was solid white and still again.
I set perfectly still, then, listening to my heart thump, and I
reckon I didn't draw a breath while it thumped a hundred.

I just give up, then.  I knowed what the matter was.  That cut
bank was an island, and Jim had gone down 'tother side of it.  It
warn't no tow-head, that you could float by in ten minutes.  It
had the big timber of a regular island; it might be five or six
mile long and more than a half a mile wide.

I kept quiet, with my ears cocked, about fifteen minutes, I
reckon.  I was floating along, of course, four or five mile an
hour; but you don't ever think of that.  No, you feel like you are
laying dead still on the water; and if a little glimpse of a snag
slips by, you don't think to yourself how fast you're going, but
you catch your breath and think, my! how that snag's tearing
along.  If you think it ain't dismal and lonesome out in a fog
that way, by yourself, in the night, you try it once -- you'll
see.

Next, for about a half an hour, I whoops now and then; at last
I hears the answer a long ways off, and tries to follow it, but I
couldn't do it, and directly I judged I'd got into a nest of
tow-heads, for I had little dim glimpses of them on both sides of
me, sometimes just a narrow channel between; and some that I
couldn't see, I knowed was there, because I'd hear the wash of the
current against the old dead brush and trash that hung over the
banks.  Well, I warn't long losing the whoops, down amongst the
tow-heads; and I only tried to chase them a little while, anyway,
because it was worse than chasing a Jack-o-lantern.  You never
knowed a sound dodge around so, and swap places so quick and so
much.

I had to claw away from the bank pretty lively, four or five
times, to keep from knocking the islands out of the river; and so
I judged the raft must be butting into the bank every now and
then, or else it would get further ahead and clear out of hearing
-- it was floating a little faster than what I was.

Well, I seemed to be in the open river again, by-and-by, but I
couldn't hear no sign of a whoop nowheres.  I reckoned Jim had
fetched up on a snag, maybe, and it was all up with him.  I was
good and tired, so I laid down in the canoe and said I wouldn't
bother no more.  I didn't want to go to sleep, of course; but I
was so sleepy I couldn't help it; so I thought I would take just
one little cat-nap.

But I reckon it was more than a cat-nap, for when I waked up
the stars was shining bright, the fog was all gone, and I was
spinning down a big bend stern first.  First I didn't know where I
was; I thought I was dreaming; and when things begun to come back
to me, they seemed to come up dim out of last week.

It was a monstrous big river here, with the tallest and the
thickest kind of timber on both banks; just a solid wall, as well
as I could see, by the stars.  I looked away down stream, and seen
a black speck on the water.  I took out after it; but when I got
to it it warn't nothing but a couple of saw-logs made fast
together.  Then I see another speck, and chased that; then
another, and this time I was right.  It was the raft.

When I got to it Jim was setting there with his head down
between his knees, asleep, with his right arm hanging over the
steering oar.  The other oar was smashed off, and the raft was
littered up with leaves and branches and dirt.  So she'd had a
rough time.

I made fast and laid down under Jim's nose on the raft, and
begun to gap, and stretch my fists out against Jim, and says:

"Hello, Jim, have I been asleep?  Why didn't you stir me up?"

"Goodness gracious, is dat you, Huck?  En you ain' dead -- you
ain' drownded -- you's back agin?  It's too good for true, honey,
it's too good for true.  Lemme look at you, chile, lemme feel o'
you.  No, you ain' dead! you's back agin,' live en soun', jis de
same old Huck -- de same ole Huck, thanks to goodness!"

"What's the matter with you, Jim?  You been a drinking?"

"Drinkin'?  Has I ben a drinkin'?  Has I had a chance to be a
drinkin'?"

"Well, then, what makes you talk so wild?"

"How does I talk wild?"

"How? why, hain't you been talking about my coming back, and
all that stuff, as if I'd been gone away?"

"Huck -- Huck Finn, you look me in de eye; look me in de eye.
Hain't you ben gone away?"

"Gone away?  Why, what in the nation do you mean?  I hain't
been gone anywheres.  Where would I go to?"

"Well, looky here, boss, dey's sumf'n wrong, dey is.  Is I me,
or who is I?  Is I heah, or whah is I?  Now dat's what I wants to
know?"

"Well, I think you're here, plain enough, but I think you're a
tangle-headed old fool, Jim."

"I is, is I?  Well you answer me dis.  Didn't you tote out de
line in de canoe, fer to make fas' to de tow-head?"

"No, I didn't.  What tow-head?  I hain't seen no tow-head."

"You hain't seen no tow-head?  Looky here -- didn't de line
pull loose en de raf' go a hummin' down de river, en leave you en
de canoe behine in de fog?"

"What fog?"

"Why de fog.  De fog dat's ben aroun' all night.  En didn't
you whoop, en didn't I whoop, tell we got mix' up in de islands en
one un us got los' en 'tother one was jis' as good as los', 'kase
he didn' know whah he wuz?  En didn't I bust up agin a lot er dem
islands en have a turrible time en mos' git drownded?  Now ain'
dat so, boss -- ain't it so?  You answer me dat."

"Well, this is too many for me, Jim.  I hain't seen no fog,
nor no islands, nor no troubles, nor nothing.  I been setting here
talking with you all night till you went to sleep about ten
minutes ago, and I reckon I done the same.  You couldn't a got
drunk in that time, so of course you've been dreaming."

"Dad fetch it, how is I gwyne to dream all dat in ten
minutes?"

"Well, hang it all, you did dream it, because there didn't any
of it happen."

"But Huck, it's all jis as plain to me as --"

"It don't make no difference how plain it is, there ain't
nothing in it.  I know, because I've been here all the time."

Jim didn't say nothing for about five minutes, but set there
studying over it.  Then he says:

"Well, den, I reck'n I did dream it, Huck; but dog my cats ef
it ain't de powerfullest dream I ever see.  En I hain't ever had
no dream b'fo' dat's tired me like dis one."

"Oh, well, that's all right, because a dream does tire a body
like everything, sometimes.  But this one was a staving dream --
tell me all about it, Jim."

So Jim went to work and told me the whole thing right through,
just as it happened, only he painted it up considerable.  Then he
said he must start in and "'terpret" it, because it was sent for a
warning.  He said the first tow-head stood for a man that would
try to do us some good, but the current was another man that would
get us away from him.  The whoops was warnings that would come to
us every now and then, and if we didn't try hard to make out to
understand them they'd just take us into bad luck, 'stead of
keeping us out of it.  The lot of tow-heads was troubles we was
going to get into with quarrelsome people and all kinds of mean
folks, but if we minded our business and didn't talk back and
aggravate them, we would pull through and get out of the fog and
into the big clear river, which was the free States, and wouldn't
have no more trouble.

It had clouded up pretty dark just after I got onto the raft,
but it was clearing up again, now.

"Oh, well, that's all interpreted well enough, as far as it
goes, Jim," I says; "but what does these things stand for?"

It was the leaves and rubbish on the raft, and the smashed
oar.  You could see them first rate, now.

Jim looked at the trash, and then looked at me, and back at
the trash again.  He had got the dream fixed so strong in his head
that he couldn't seem to shake it loose and get the facts back
into its place again, right away.  But when he did get the thing
straightened around, he looked at me steady, without ever smiling,
and says:

"What do dey stan' for?  I's gwyne to tell you.  When I got
all wore out wid work, en wid de callin' for you, en went to
sleep, my heart wuz mos' broke bekase you wuz los', en I didn'
k'yer no mo' what become er me en de raf'.  En when I wake up en
fine you back agin', all safe en soun', de tears come en I could a
got down on my knees en kiss' yo' foot I's so thankful.  En all
you wuz thinkin 'bout wuz how you could make a fool uv old Jim wid
a lie.  Dat truck dah is trash,' en trash is what people is dat
puts dirt on de head er dey fren's en makes 'em ashamed."

Then he got up slow, and walked to the wigwam, and went in
there, without saying anything but that.  But that was enough.  It
made me feel so mean I could almost kissed his foot to get him to
take it back.

It was fifteen minutes before I could work myself up to go and
humble myself to a nigger -- but I done it, and I warn't ever
sorry for it afterwards, neither.  I didn't do him no more mean
tricks, and I wouldn't done that one if I'd a knowed it would make
him feel that way.


Adventures of Huckleberry Finn -- Chapter XVI
We slept most all day, and started out at night, a little ways
behind a monstrous long raft that was as long going by as a
procession.  She had four long sweeps at each end, so we judged
she carried as many as thirty men, likely.  She had five big
wig-wams aboard, wide apart, and an open camp fire in the middle,
and a tall flag-pole at each end.  There was a power of style
about her.  It amounted to something being a raftsman on such a
craft as that.

We went drifting down into a big bend, and the night clouded
up and got hot.  The river was very wide, and was walled with
solid timber on both sides; you couldn't see a break in it hardly
ever, or a light.  We talked about Cairo, and wondered whether we
would know it when we got to it.  I said likely we wouldn't,
because I had heard say there warn't but about a dozen houses
there, and if they didn't happen to have them lit up, how was we
going to know we was passing a town?  Jim said if the two big
rivers joined together there, that would show.  But I said maybe
we might think we was passing the foot of an island and coming
into the same old river again.  That disturbed Jim -- and me too.
So the question was, what to do?  I said, paddle ashore the first
time a light showed, and tell them pap was behind, coming along
with a trading-scow, and was a green hand at the business, and
wanted to know how far it was to Cairo.  Jim thought it was a good
idea, so we took a smoke on it and waited.

There warn't nothing to do, now, but to look out sharp for the
town, and not pass it without seeing it.  He said he'd be mighty
sure to see it, because he'd be a free man the minute he seen it,
but if he missed it he'd be in the slave country again and no more
show for freedom.  Every little while he jumps up and says:

"Dah she is!"

But it warn't.  It was Jack-o-lanterns, or lightning-bugs; so
he set down again, and went to watching, same as before.  Jim said
it made him all over trembly and feverish to be so close to
freedom.  Well, I can tell you it made me all over trembly and
feverish, too, to hear him, because I begun to get it through my
head that he was most free -- and who was to blame for it?  Why,
me.  I couldn't get that out of my conscience, no how nor no way.
It got to troubling me so I couldn't rest; I couldn't stay still
in one place.  It hadn't ever come home to me before, what this
thing was that I was doing.  But now it did; and it staid with me,
and scorched me more and more.  I tried to make out to myself that
I warn't to blame, because I didn't run Jim off from his rightful
owner; but it warn't no use, conscience up and says, every time,
"But you knowed he was running for his freedom, and you could a
paddled ashore and told somebody."  That was so -- I couldn't get
around that, noway.  That was where it pinched.  Conscience says
to me, "What had poor Miss Watson done to you, that you could see
her nigger go off right under your eyes and never say one single
word?  What did that poor old woman do to you, that you could
treat her so mean?  Why, she tried to learn you your book, she
tried to learn you your manners, she tried to be good to you every
way she knowed how.  That's what she done."

I got to feeling so mean and so miserable I most wished I was
dead.  I fidgeted up and down the raft, abusing myself to myself,
and Jim was fidgeting up and down past me.  We neither of us could
keep still.  Every time he danced around and says, "Dah's Cairo!"
it went through me like a shot, and I thought if it was Cairo I
reckoned I would die of miserableness.

Jim talked out loud all the time while I was talking to
myself.  He was saying how the first thing he would do when he got
to a free State he would go to saving up money and never spend a
single cent, and when he got enough he would buy his wife, which
was owned on a farm close to where Miss Watson lived; and then
they would both work to buy the two children, and if their master
wouldn't sell them, they'd get an Ab'litionist to go and steal
them.

It most froze me to hear such talk.  He wouldn't ever dared to
talk such talk in his life before.  Just see what a difference it
made in him the minute he judged he was about free.  It was
according to the old saying, "give a nigger an inch and he'll take
an ell."  Thinks I, this is what comes of my not thinking.  Here
was this nigger which I had as good as helped to run away, coming
right out flat-footed and saying he would steal his children --
children that belonged to a man I didn't even know; a man that
hadn't ever done me no harm.

I was sorry to hear Jim say that, it was such a lowering of
him.  My conscience got to stirring me up hotter than ever, until
at last I says to it.  "Let up on me -- it ain't too late, yet --
I'll paddle ashore at the first light, and tell."  I felt easy,
and happy, and light as a feather, right off.  All my troubles was
gone.  I went to looking out sharp for a light, and sort of
singing to myself.  By-and-by one showed.  Jim sings out:

"We's safe, Huck, we's safe!  Jump up and crack yo' heels,
dat's de good ole Cairo at las', I jis knows it!"

I says:

"I'll take the canoe and go see, Jim.  It mightn't be, you
know."

He jumped and got the canoe ready, and put his old coat in the
bottom for me to set on, and give me the paddle; and as I shoved
off, he says:

"Pooty soon I'll be a-shout'n for joy, en I'll say, it's all
on accounts o' Huck; I's a free man, en I couldn't ever ben free
ef it hadn' ben for Huck; Huck done it.  Jim won't ever forgit
you, Huck; you's de bes' fren' Jim's ever had; en you's de only
fren' ole Jim's got now."

I was paddling off, all in a sweat to tell on him; but when he
says this, it seemed to kind of take the tuck all out of me.  I
went along slow then, and I warn't right down certain whether I
was glad I started or whether I warn't.  When I was fifty yards
off, Jim says:

"Dah you goes, de ole true Huck; de on'y white genlman dat
ever kep' his promise to ole Jim."

Well, I just felt sick.  But I says, I got to do it -- I can't
get out of it.  Right then, along comes a skiff with two men in
it, with guns, and they stopped and I stopped.  One of them says:

"What's that, yonder?"

"A piece of a raft," I says.

"Do you belong on it?"

"Yes, sir."

"Any men on it?"

"Only one, sir."

"Well, there's five niggers run off to-night, up yonder above
the head of the bend.  Is your man white or black?"

I didn't answer up prompt.  I tried to, but the words wouldn't
come.  I tried, for a second or two, to brace up and out with it,
but I warn't man enough -- hadn't the spunk of a rabbit.  I see I
was weakening; so I just give up trying, and up and says --

"He's white."

"I reckon we'll go and see for ourselves."

"I wish you would," says I, "because it's pap that's there,
and maybe you'd help me tow the raft ashore where the light is.
He's sick -- and so is mam and Mary Ann."

"Oh, the devil! we're in a hurry', boy.  But I s'pose we've
got to.  Come -- buckle to you paddle, and let's get along."

I buckled to my paddle and they laid to their oars.  When we
had made a stroke or two, I says:

"Pap'll be mighty much obleeged to you, I can tell you.
Everybody goes away when I want them to help me tow the raft
ashore, and I can't do it by myself."

"Well, that's infernal mean.  Odd, too.  Say, boy, what's the
matter with your father?"

"It's the -- a -- the -- well, it ain't anything, much."

They stopped pulling.  It warn't but a mighty little ways to
the raft now.  One says:

"Boy, that's a lie.  What is the matter with your pap?  Answer
up square now, and it'll be the better for you."

"I will, sir, I will, honest -- but don't leave us, please.
It's the -- the -- gentlemen, if you'll only pull ahead, and let
me heave you the head-line, you won't have to come a-near the raft
-- please do."

"Set her back, John, set her back!" says one.  They backed
water.  "Keep away, boy -- keep to looard.  Confound it, I just
expect the wind has blowed it to us.  Your pap's got the
small-pox, and you know it precious well.  Why didn't you come out
and say so?  Do you want to spread it all over?"

"Well," says I, a-blubbering, "I've told everybody before, and
then they just went away and left us."

"Poor devil, there's something in that.  We are right down
sorry for you, but we -- well, hang it, we don't want the
small-pox, you see.  Look here, I'll tell you what to do.  Don't
you try to land by yourself, or you'll smash everything to pieces.
You float along down about twenty miles and you'll come to a town
on the left-hand side of the river.  It will be long after sun-up,
then, and when you ask for help, you tell them your folks are all
down with chills and fever.  Don't be a fool again, and let people
guess what is the matter.  Now we're trying to do you a kindness;
so you just put twenty miles between us, that's a good boy.  It
wouldn't do any good to land yonder where the light is -- it's
only a wood-yard.  Say -- I reckon your father's poor, and I'm
bound to say he's in pretty hard luck.  Here -- I'll put a twenty
dollar gold piece on this board, and you get it when it floats by.
I feel mighty mean to leave you, but my kingdom! it won't do to
fool with small-pox, don't you see?"

"Hold on, Parker," says the other man, "here's a twenty to put
on the board for me.  Good-bye, boy, you do as Mr. Parker told
you, and you'll be all right."

"That's so, my boy -- good-bye, good-bye.  If you see any
runaway niggers, you get help and nab them, and you can make some
money by it."

"Good-bye, sir," says I, "I won't let no runaway niggers get
by me if I can help it."

They went off, and I got aboard the raft, feeling bad and low,
because I knowed very well I had done wrong, and I see it warn't
no use for me to try to learn to do right; a body that don't get
started right when he's little, ain't got no show -- when the
pinch comes there ain't nothing to back him up and keep him to his
work, and so he gets beat.  Then I thought a minute, and says to
myself, hold on, -- s'pose you'd a done right and give Jim up;
would you felt better than what you do now?  No, says I, I'd feel
bad--I'd feel just the same way I do now.  Well, then, says I,
what's the use you learning to do right, when it's troublesome to
do right and ain't no trouble to do wrong, and the wages is just
the same?  I was stuck.  I couldn't answer that.  So I reckoned I
wouldn't bother no more about it, but after this always do
whichever come handiest at the time.

I went into the wigwam; Jim warn't there.  I looked all
around; he warn't anywhere.  I says:

"Jim!"

"Here I is, Huck.  Is dey out o' sight yit?  Don't talk loud."

He was in the river, under the stern oar, with just his nose
out.  I told him they was out of sight, so he come aboard.  He
says:

"I was a-listenin' to all de talk, en I slips into de river en
was gwyne to shove for sho' if dey come aboard.  Den I was gwyne
to swim to de raf' agin when dey was gone.  But lawsy, how you did
fool 'em, Huck!  Dat wuz de smartes' dodge!  I tell you, chile, I
'speck it save' ole Jim -- ole Jim ain't gwyne to forgit you for
dat, honey."

Then we talked about the money.  It was a pretty good raise,
twenty dollars apiece.  Jim said we could take deck passage on a
steamboat now, and the money would last us as far as we wanted to
go in the free States.  He said twenty mile more warn't far for
the raft to go, but he wished we was already there.

Towards daybreak we tied up, and Jim was mighty particular
about hiding the raft good.  Then he worked all day fixing things
in bundles, and getting all ready to quit rafting.

That night about ten we hove in sight of the lights of a town
away down in a left-hand bend.

I went off in the canoe, to ask about it.  Pretty soon I found
a man out in the river with a skiff, setting a trot-line.  I
ranged up and says:

"Mister, is that town Cairo?"

"Cairo? no.  You must be a blame' fool."

"What town is it, mister?"

"If you want to know, go and find out.  If you stay here
botherin' around me for about a half a minute longer, you'll get
something you won't want."

I paddled to the raft.  Jim was all disappointed, but I said
never mind, Cairo would be the next place, I reckoned.

We passed another town before daylight, and I was going out
again; but it was high ground, so I didn't go.  No high ground
about Cairo, Jim said.  I had forgot it.  We laid up for the day,
on a tow-head tolerable close to the left-hand bank.  I begun to
suspicion something.  So did Jim.  I says:

"Maybe we went by Cairo in the fog that night."

He says:

"Doan' less' talk about it, Huck.  Po' niggers can't have no
luck.  I awluz 'spected dat rattle-snake skin warn't done wid it's
work."

"I wish I'd never seen that snake-skin, Jim -- I do wish I'd
never laid eyes on it."

"It ain't yo' fault, Huck; you didn' know.  Don't you blame
yo'self 'bout it."

When it was daylight, here was the clear Ohio water in shore,
sure enough, and outside was the old regular Muddy!  So it was all
up with Cairo.

We talked it all over.  It wouldn't do to take to the shore;
we couldn't take the raft up the stream, of course.  There warn't
no way but to wait for dark, and start back in the canoe and take
the chances.  So we slept all day amongst the cotton-wood thicket,
so as to be fresh for the work, and when we went back to the raft
about dark the canoe was gone!

We didn't say a word for a good while.  There warn't anything
to say.  We both knowed well enough it was some more work of the
rattle-snake skin; so what was the use to talk about it?  It would
only look like we was finding fault, and that would be bound to
fetch more bad luck -- and keep on fetching it, too, till we
knowed enough to keep still.

By-and-by we talked about what we better do, and found there
warn't no way but just to go along down with the raft till we got
a chance to buy a canoe to go back in.  We warn't going to borrow
it when there warn't anybody around, the way pap would do, for
that might set people after us.

So we shoved out, after dark, on the raft.

Anybody that don't believe yet, that it's foolishness to
handle a snake-skin, after all that snake-skin done for us, will
believe it now, if they read on and see what more it done for us.

The place to buy canoes is off of rafts laying up at shore.
But we didn't see no rafts laying up; so we went along during
three hours and more.  Well, the night got gray, and ruther thick,
which is the next meanest thing to fog.  You can't tell the shape
of the river, and you can't see no distance.  It got to be very
late and still, and then along comes a steamboat up the river.  We
lit the lantern, and judged she would see it.  Up-stream boats
didn't generly come close to us; they go out and follow the bars
and hunt for easy water under the reefs; but nights like this they
bull right up the channel against the whole river.

We could hear her pounding along, but we didn't see her good
till she was close.  She aimed right for us.  Often they do that
and try to see how close they can come without touching; sometimes
the wheel bites off a sweep, and then the pilot sticks his head
out and laughs, and thinks he's mighty smart.  Well, here she
comes, and we said she was going to try to shave us; but she
didn't seem to be sheering off a bit.  She was a big one, and she
was coming in a hurry, too, looking like a black cloud with rows
of glow-worms around it; but all of a sudden she bulged out, big
and scary, with a long row of wide-open furnace doors shining like
red-hot teeth, and her monstrous bows and guards hanging right
over us.  There was a yell at us, and a jingling of bells to stop
the engines, a pow-wow of cussing, and whistling of steam -- and
as Jim went overboard on one side and I on the other, she come
smashing straight through the raft.

I dived -- and I aimed to find the bottom, too, for a
thirty-foot wheel had got to go over me, and I wanted it to have
plenty of room.  I could always stay under water a minute; this
time I reckon I staid under water a minute and a half.  Then I
bounced for the top in a hurry, for I was nearly busting.  I
popped out to my arm-pits and blowed the water out of my nose, and
puffed a bit.  Of course there was a booming current; and of
course that boat started her engines again ten seconds after she
stopped them, for they never cared much for raftsmen; so now whe
was churning along up the river, out of sight in the thick
weather, though I could hear her.

I sung out for Jim about a dozen times, but I didn't get any
answer; so I grabbed a plank that touched me while I was "treadin
water," and struck out for shore, shoving it ahead of me.  But I
made out to see that the drift of the current was towards the
left-hand shore, which meant that I was in a crossing; so I
changed off and went that way.

It was one of these long, slanting, two-mile crossings; so I
was a good long time in getting over.  I made a safe landing, and
clum up the bank.  I couldn't see but a little ways, but I went
poking along over rough ground for a quarter of a mile or more,
and then I run across a big old-fashioned double log house before
I noticed it.  I was going to rush by and get away, but a lot of
dogs jumped out and went to howling and barking at me, and I
knowed better than to move another peg.


Adventures of Huckleberry Finn -- Chapter XVII
In about half a minute somebody spoke out of a window, without
putting his head out, and says:

"Be done, boys!  Who's there?"

I says:

"It's me."

"Who's me?"

"George Jackson, sir."

"What do you want?"

"I don't want nothing, sir.  I only want to go along by, but
the dogs won't let me."

"What are you prowling around here this time of night, for --
hey?"

"I warn't prowling around, sir; I fell overboard off of the
steamboat."

"Oh, you did, did you?  Strike a light there, somebody.  What
did you say your name was?"

"George Jackson, sir.  I'm only a boy."

"Look here; if you're telling the truth, you needn't be afraid
-- nobody'll hurt you.  But don't try to budge; stand right where
you are.  Rouse out Bob and Tom, some of you, and fetch the guns.
George Jackson, is there anybody with you?"

"No, sir, nobody."

I heard the people stirring around in the house, now, and see
a light.  The man sung out:

"Snatch that light away, Betsy, you old fool -- ain't you got
any sense?  Put it on the floor behind the front door.  Bob, if
you and Tom are ready, take your places."

"All ready."

"Now, George Jackson, do you know the Shepherdsons?"

"No, sir -- I never heard of them."

"Well, that may be so, and it mayn't.  Now, all ready.  Step
forward, George Jackson.  And mind, don't you hurry -- come mighty
slow.  If there's anybody with you, let him keep back -- if the
shows himself he'll be shot.  Come along, now.  Come slow; push
the door open, yourself -- just enough to squeeze in, d' you
hear?"

I didn't hurry, I couldn't if I'd a wanted to.  I took one
slow step at a time, and there warn't a sound, only I thought I
could hear my heart.  The dogs were as still as the humans, but
they followed a little behind me.  When I got to the three log
door-steps, I heard them unlocking and unbarring and unbolting.  I
put my hand on the door and pushed it a little and a little more,
till somebody said, "There, that's enough -- put your head in."  I
done it, but I judged they would take it off.

The candle was on the floor, and there they all was, looking
at me, and me at them, for about a quarter of a minute.  Three big
men with guns pointed at me, which made me wince, I tell you; the
oldest, gray and about sixty, the other two thirty or more -- all
of them fine and handsome -- and the sweetest old gray-headed
lady, and back of her two young women which I couldn't see right
well.  The old gentleman says:

"There -- I reckon it's all right.  Come in."

As soon as I was in, the old gentleman he locked the door and
barred it and bolted it, and told the young men to come in with
their guns, and they all went in a big parlor that had a new rag
carpet on the floor, and got together in a corner that was out of
range of the front windows -- there warn't none on the side.  They
held the candle, and took a good look at me, and all said, "Why he
ain't a Shepherdson -- no there ain't any Shepherdson about him."
Then the old man said he hoped I wouldn't mind being searched for
arms, because he didn't mean no harm by it -- it was only to make
sure.  So he didn't pry into my pockets, but only felt outside
with his hands, and said it was all right.  He told me to make
myself easy and at home, and tell all about myself; but the old
lady says:

"Why bless you, Saul, the poor thing's as wet as he can be;
and don't you reckon it may be he's hungry?"

"True for you, Rachel -- I forgot."

So the old lady says:

"Betsy" (this was a nigger woman), "you fly around and get him
something to eat, as quick as you can, poor thing; and one of you
girls go and wake up Buck and tell him -- Oh, here he is himself.
Buck, take this little stranger and get the wet clothes off from
him and dress him up in some of yours that's dry."

Buck looked about as old as me -- thirteen or fourteen or
along there, though he was a little bigger than me.  He hadn't on
anything but a shirt, and he was very frowsy-headed.  He come in
gaping and digging one fist into his eyes, and he was dragging a
gun along with the other one.  He says:

"Ain't they no Shepherdsons around?"

They said, no, 'twas a false alarm.

"Well," he says, "if they'd a ben some, I reckon I'd a got
one."

They all laughed, and Bob says:

"Why, Buck, they might have scalped us all, you've been so
slow in coming."

"Well, nobody come after me, and it ain't right.  I'm always
kep' down; I don't get no show."

"Never mind, Buck, my boy," says the old man, "you'll have
show enough, all in good time, don't you fret about that.  Go
'long with you now, and do as your mother told you."

When we got up stairs to his room, he got me a coarse shirt
and a round-about and pants of his, and I put them on.  While I
was at it he asked me what my name was, but before I could tell
him, he started to telling me about a blue jay and a young rabbit
he had catched in the woods day before yesterday, and he asked me
where Moses was when the candle went out.  I said I didn't know; I
hadn't heard about it before, no way.

"Well, guess," he says.

"How'm I going to guess," says I, "when I never heard tell
about it before?"

"But you can guess, can't you?  It's just as easy."

"Which candle?" I says.

"Why, any candle," he says.

"I don't know where he was," says I; "where was he?"

"Why he was in the dark!  That's where he was!"

"Well, if you knowed where he was, what did you ask me for?"

"Why, blame it, it's a riddle, don't you see?  Say, how long
are you going to stay here?  You got to stay always.  We can just
have booming times -- they don't have no school now.  Do you own a
dog?  I've got a dog -- and he'll go in the river and bring out
chips that you throw in.  Do you like to comb up, Sundays, and all
that kind of foolishness?  You bet I don't, but ma she makes me.
Confound these ole britches, I reckon I'd better put 'em on, but
I'd ruther not, it's so warm.  Are you all ready?  All right --
come along, old hoss."

Cold corn-pone, cold corn-beef, butter and butter-milk -- that
is what they had for me down there, and there ain't nothing better
that ever I've come across yet.  Buck and his ma and all of them
smoked cob pipes, except the nigger woman, which was gone, and the
two young women.  They all smoked and talked, and I eat and
talked.  The young women had quilts around them, and their hair
down their backs.  They all asked me questions, and I told them
how pap and me and all the family was living on a little farm down
at the bottom of Arkansaw, and my sister Mary Ann run off and got
married and never was heard of no more, and Bill went to hunt them
and he warn't heard of no more, and Tom and Mort died, and then
there warn't nobody but just me and pap left, and he was just
trimmed down to nothing, on account of his troubles; so when he
died I took what there was left, because the farm didn't belong to
us, and started up the river, deck passage, and fell overboard;
and that was how I come to be here.  So they said I could have a
home there as long as I wanted it.  Then it was most daylight, and
everybody went to bed, and I went to bed with Buck, and when I
waked up in the morning, drat it all, I had forgot what my name
was.  So I laid there about an hour trying to think, and when Buck
waked up, I says:

"Can you spell, Buck?"

"Yes," he says.

"I bet you can't spell my name," says I.

"I bet you what you dare I can," says he.

"All right," says I, "go ahead."

"G-o-r-g-e J-a-x-o-n -- there now," he says.

"Well," says I, "you done it, but I didn't think you could.
It ain't no slouch of a name to spell -- right off without
studying."

I set it down, private, because somebody might want me to
spell it, next, and so I wanted to be handy with it and rattle it
off like I was used to it.

It was a mighty nice family, and a mighty nice house, too.  I
hadn't seen no house out in the country before that was so nice
and had so much style.  It didn't have an iron latch on the front
door, nor a wooden one with a buckskin string, but a brass knob to
turn, the same as houses in a town.  There warn't no bed in the
parlor, not a sign of a bed; but heaps of parlors in towns has
beds in them.  There was a big fireplace that was bricked on the
bottom, and the bricks was kept clean and red by pouring water on
them and scrubbing them with another brick; sometimes they washed
them over with red water-paint that they call Spanish-brown, same
as they do in town.  They had big brass dog-irons that could hold
up a saw-log.  There was a clock on the middle of the
mantel-piece, with a picture of a town painted on the bottom half
of the glass front, and a round place in the middle of it for the
sun, and you could see the pendulum swing behind it.  It was
beautiful to hear that clock tick; and sometimes when one of these
peddlers had been along and scoured her up and got her in good
shape, she would start in and strike a hundred and fifty before
she got tuckered out.  They wouldn't took any money for her.

Well, there was a big outlandish parrot on each side of the
clock, made out of something like chalk, and painted up gaudy.  By
one of the parrots was a cat made of crockery, and a crockery dog
by the other; and when you pressed down on them they squeaked, but
didn't open their mouths nor look different nor interested.  They
squeaked through underneath.  There was a couple of big
wild-turkey-wing fans spread out behind those things.  On a table
in the middle of the room was a kind of a lovely crockery basket
that had apples and oranges and peaches and grapes piled up in it
which was much redder and yellower and prettier than real ones is,
but they warn't real because you could see where pieces had got
chipped off and showed the white chalk or whatever it was,
underneath.

This table had a cover made out of beautiful oil-cloth, with a
red and blue spread-eagle painted on it, and a painted border all
around.  It come all the way from Philadelphia, they said.  There
was some books too, piled up perfectly exact, on each corner of
the table.  One was a big family Bible, full of pictures.  One was
"Pilgrim's Progress," about a man that left his family it didn't
say why.  I read considerable in it now and then.  The statements
was interesting, but tough.  Another was "Friendship's Offering,"
full of beautiful stuff and poetry; but I didn't read the poetry.
Another was Henry Clay's Speeches, and another was Dr. Gunn's
Family Medicine, which told you all about what to do if a body was
sick or dead.  There was a Hymn Book, and a lot of other books.
And there was nice split-bottom chairs, and perfectly sound, too
-- not bagged down in the middle and busted, like an old basket.

They had pictures hung on the walls -- mainly Washingtons and
Lafayettes, and battles, and Highland Marys, and one called
"Signing the Declaration."  There was some that they called
crayons, which one of the daughters which was dead made her own
self when she was only fifteen years old.  They was different from
any pictures I ever see before; blacker, mostly, than is common.
One was a woman in a slim black dress, belted small under the
arm-pits, with bulges like a cabbage in the middle of the sleeves,
and a large black scoop-shovel bonnet with a black veil, and white
slim ankles crossed about with black tape, and very wee black
slippers, like a chisel, and she was leaning pensive on a
tombstone on her right elbow, under a weeping willow, and her
other hand hanging down her side holding a white handkerchief and
a reticule, and underneath the picture it said "Shall I Never See
Thee More Alas."  Another one was a young lady with her hair all
combed up straight to the top of her head, and knotted there in
front of a comb like a chair-back, and she was crying into a
handerchief and had a dead bird laying on its back in her other
hand with its heels up, and underneath the picture it said "I
Shall Never Hear The Sweet Chirrup More Alas."  There was one
where a young lady was at a window looking up at the moon, and
tears running down her cheeks; and she had an open letter in one
hand with black sealing-wax showing on one edge of it, and she was
mashing a locket with a chain to it against her mouth, and
underneath the picture it said "And Art Thou Gone Yes Thou Art
Gone Alas."  These was all nice pictures, I reckon, but I didn't
somehow seem to take to them, because if ever I was down a little,
they always give me the fan-tods.  Everybody was sorry she died,
because she had laid out a lot more of these pictures to do, and a
body could see by what she had done what they had lost.  But I
reckoned, that with her disposition, she was having a better time
in the graveyard.  She was at work on what they said was her
greatest picture when she took sick, and every day and every night
it was her prayer to be allowed to live till she got it done, but
she never got the chance.  It was a picture of a young woman in a
long white gown, standing on the rail of a bridge all ready to
jump off, with her hair all down her back, and looking up to the
moon, with the tears running down her face, and she had two arms
folded across her breast, and two arms stretched out in front, and
two more reaching up towards the moon -- and the idea was, to see
which pair would look best and then scratch out all the other
arms; but, as I was saying, she died before she got her mind made
up, and now they kept this picture over the head of the bed in her
room, and every time her birthday come they hung flowers on it.
Other times it was hid with a little curtain.  The young woman in
the picture had a kind of a nice sweet face, but there was so many
arms it made her look too spidery, seemed to me.

This young girl kept a scrap-book when she was alive, and used
to paste obituaries and accidents and cases of patient suffering
in it out of the Presbyterian Observer, and write poetry.  This is
what she wrote about a boy by the name of Stephen Dowling Bots
that fell down a well and was drownded:

ODE TO STEPHEN DOWLING BOTS, DEC'D

And did young Stephen sicken,
And did young Stephen die?
And did the sad hearts thicken,
And did the mourners cry?

No; such was not the fate of
Young Stephen Dowling Bots;
Though sad hearts round him thickened,
'Twas not from sickness' shots.

No whooping-cough did rack his frame,
Nor measles drear, with spots;
Not these impaired the sacred name
Of Stephen Dowling Bots.

Despised love struck not with woe
That head of curly knots,
Nor stomach troubles laid him low.
Young Stephen Dowling Bots.

O no.  Then list with tearful eye,
Whilst I his fate do tell.
His soul did from this cold world fly,
By falling down a well.

They got him out and emptied him;
Alas it was too late;
His spirit was gone for to sport aloft
In the realms of the good and great.

If Emmeline Grangerford could make poetry like that before she
was fourteen, there ain't no telling what she could a done
by-and-by.  Buck said she could rattle off poetry like nothing.
She didn't ever have to stop to think.  He said she would slap
down a line, and if she couldn't find anything to rhyme with it
she would just scratch it out and slap down another one, and go
ahead.  She warn't particular, she could write about anything you
choose to give her to write about, just so it was sadful.  Every
time a man died, or a woman died, or a child died, she would be on
hand with her "tribute" before he was cold.  She called them
tributes.  The neighbors said it was the doctor first, then
Emmeline, then the undertaker -- the undertaker never got in ahead
of Emmeline but once, and then she hung fire on a rhyme for the
dead person's name, which was Whistler.  She warn't ever the same,
after that; she never complained, but she kind of pined away and
did not live long.  Poor thing, many's the time I made myself go
up to the little room that used to be hers and get out her poor
old scrap-book and read in it when her pictures had been
aggravating me and I had soured on her a little.  I liked all that
family, dead ones and all, and warn't going to let anything come
between us.  Poor Emmeline made poetry about all the dead people
when she was alive, and it didn't seem right that there warn't
nobody to make some about her, now she was gone; so I tried to
sweat out a verse or two myself, but I couldn't seem to make it
go, somehow.  They kept Emmeline's room trim and nice and all the
things fixed in it just the way she liked to have them when she
was alive, and nobody ever slept there.  The old lady took care of
the room herself, though there was plenty of niggers, and she
sewed there a good deal and read her Bible there, mostly.

Well, as I was saying about the parlor, there was beautiful
curtains on the windows; white, with pictures painted on them, of
castles with vines all down the walls, and cattle coming down to
drink.  There was a little old piano, too, that had tin pans in
it, I reckon, and nothing was ever so lovely as to hear the young
ladies sing, "The Last Link is Broken" and play "The Battle of
Prague" on it.  The walls of all the rooms was plastered, and most
had carpets on the floors, and the whole house was whitewashed on
the outside.

It was a double house, and the big open place betwixt them was
roofed and floored; and sometimes the table was set there in the
middle of the day, and it was a cool, comfortable place.  Nothing
couldn't be better.  And warn't the cooking good, and just bushels
of it too!


Adventures of Huckleberry Finn -- Chapter XVIII
Col. Grangerford was a gentleman, you see.  He was a gentleman
all over; and so was his family.  He was well born, as the saying
is and that's worth as much in a man as it is in a horse, so the
Widow Douglass said, and nobody ever denied that she was of the
first aristocracy in our town; and pap he always said it, too,
though he warn't no more quality than a mud-cat, himself.  Col.
Grangerford was very tall and very slim, and had a darkish-paly
complexion, not a sign of red in it anywheres; he was clean-shaved
every morning, all over his thin face, and he had the thinnest
kind of lips, and the thinnest kind of nostrils, and a high nose,
and heavy eyebrows, and the blackest kind of eyes, sunk so deep
back that they seemed like they was looking out of caverns at you,
as you may say.  His forehead was high, and his hair was black and
straight, and hung to his shoulders.  His hands was long and thin,
and every day of his life he put on a clean shirt and a full suit
from head to foot made out of linen so white it hurt your eyes to
look at it; and on Sundays he wore a blue tail-coat with brass
buttons on it.  He carried a mahogany cane with a silver head to
it.  There warn't no frivolishness about him, not a bit, and he
warn't ever loud.  He was as kind as he could be -- you could feel
that, you know, and so you had confidence.  Sometimes he smiled,
and it was good to see; but when he straightened himself up like a
liberty-pole, and the lightning begun to flicker out from under
his eyebrows you wanted to climb a tree first, and find out what
the matter was afterwards.  He didn't ever have to tell anybody to
mind their manners -- everybody was always good mannered where he
was.  Everybody loved to have him around, too; he was sunshine
most always -- I mean he made it seem like good weather.  When he
turned into a cloud-bank it was awful dark for a half a minute and
that was enough; there wouldn't nothing go wrong again for a week.

When him and the old lady come down in the morning, all the
family got up out of their chairs and give them good-day, and
didn't set down again till they had set down.  Then Tom and Bob
went to the sideboard where the decanters was, and mixed a glass
of bitters and handed it to him, and he held it in his hand and
waited till Tom's and Bob's was mixed, and then they bowed and
said "Our duty to you, sir, and madam;" and they bowed the least
bit in the world and said thank you, and so they drank, all three,
and Bob and Tom poured a spoonful of water on the sugar and the
mite of whisky or apple brandy in the bottom of their tumblers,
and give it to me and Buck, and we drank to the old people too.

Bob was the oldest, and Tom next.  Tall, beautiful men with
very broad shoulders and brown faces, and long black hair and
black eyes.  They dressed in white linen from head to foot, like
the old gentleman, and wore broad Panama hats.

Then there was Miss Charlotte, she was twenty-five, and tall
and proud and grand, but as good as she could be, when she warn't
stirred up; but when she was, she had a look that would make you
wilt in your tracks, like her father.  She was beautiful.

So was her sister, Miss Sophia, but it was a different kind.
She was gentle and sweet, like a dove, and she was only twenty.

Each person had their own nigger to wait on them -- Buck, too.
My nigger had a monstrous easy time, because I warn't used to
having anybody do anything for me, but Buck's was on the jump most
of the time.

This was all there was of the family, now; but there used to
be more -- three sons; they got killed; and Emmeline that died.

The old gentleman owned a lot of farms, and over a hundred
niggers.  Sometimes a stack of people would come there, horseback,
from ten or fifteen mile around, and stay five or six days, and
have such junketings round about and on the river, and dances and
picnics in the woods, day-times, and balls at the house, nights.
These people was mostly kin-folks of the family.  The men brought
their guns with them.  It was a handsome lot of quality, I tell
you.

There was another clan of aristocracy around there -- five or
six families -- mostly of the name of Shepherdson.  They was as
high-toned, and well born, and rich and grand, as the tribe of
Grangerfords.  The Shepherdsons and the Grangerfords used the same
steamboat landing, which was about two mile above our house; so
sometimes when I went up there with a lot of our folks I used to
see a lot of the Shepherdsons there, on their fine horses.

One day Buck and me was away out in the woods, hunting, and
heard a horse coming.  We was crossing the road.  Buck says:

"Quick!  Jump for the woods!"

We done it, and then peeped down the woods through the leaves.
Pretty soon a splendid young man come galloping down the road,
setting his horse easy and looking like a soldier.  He had his gun
across his pommel.  I had seen him before.  It was young Harney
Shepherdson.  I heard Buck's gun go off at my ear, and Harney's
hat tumbled off from his head.  He grabbed his gun and rode
straight to the place where we was hid.  But we didn't wait.  We
started through the woods on a run.  The woods warn't thick, so I
looked over my shoulder, to dodge the bullet, and twice I seen
Harney cover Buck with his gun; and then he rode away the way he
come -- to get his hat, I reckon, but I couldn't see.  We never
stopped running till we got home.  The old gentleman's eyes blazed
a minute -- 'twas pleasure, mainly, I judged -- then his face sort
of smoothed down, and he says, kind of gentle:

"I don't like that shooting from behind a bush.  Why didn't
you step into the road, my boy?"

"The Shepherdsons don't, father.  They always take advantage."

Miss Charlotte she held her head up like a queen while Buck
was telling his tale, and her nostrils spread and her eyes
snapped.  The two young men looked dark, but never said nothing.
Miss Sophia she turned pale, but the color come back when she
found the man warn't hurt.

Soon as I could get Buck down by the corn-cribs under the
trees by ourselves, I says:

"Did you want to kill him, Buck?"

"Well, I bet I did."

"What did he do to you?"

"Him?  He never done nothing to me."

"Well, then, what did you want to kill him for?"

"Why nothing -- only it's on account of the feud."

"What's a feud?"

"Why, where was you raised?  Don't you know what a feud is?"

"Never heard of it before -- tell me about it."

"Well," says Buck, "a feud is this way.  A man has a quarrel
with another man, and kills him; then that other man's brother
kills him; then the other brothers, on both sides, goes for one
another; then the cousins chip in -- and by-and-by everybody's
killed off, and there ain't no more feud.  But it's kind of slow,
and takes a long time."

"Has this one been going on long, Buck?"

"Well I should reckon! it started thirty year ago, or som'ers
along there.  There was trouble 'bout something and then a lawsuit
to settle it; and the suit went agin one of the men, and so he up
and shot the man that won the suit -- which he would naturally do,
of course.  Anybody would."

"What was the trouble about, Buck? -- land?"

"I reckon maybe -- I don't know."

"Well, who done the shooting? -- was it a Grangerford or a
Shepherdson?"

"Laws, how do I know? it was so long ago."

"Don't anybody know?"

"Oh, yes, pa knows, I reckon, and some of the other old folks;
but they don't know, now, what the row was about in the first
place."

"Has there been many killed, Buck?"

"Yes -- right smart chance of funerals.  But they don't always
kill.  Pa's got a few buck-shot in him; but he don't mind it 'cuz
he don't weigh much anyway.  Bob's been carved up some with a
bowie, and Tom's been hurt once or twice."

"Has anybody been killed this year, Buck?"

"Yes, we got one and they got one.  'Bout three months ago, my
cousin Bud, fourteen year old, was riding through the woods, on
t'other side of the river, and didn't have no weapon with him,
which was blame' foolishness, and in a lonesome place he hears a
horse a-coming behind him, and sees old Baldy Shepherdson
a-linkin' after him with his gun in his hand and his white hair
a-flying in the wind; and 'stead of jumping off and taking to the
brush, Bud 'lowed he could outrun him; so they had it, nip and
tuck, for five mile or more, the old man a-gaining all the time;
so at last Bud seen it warn't any use, so he stopped and faced
around so as to have the bullet holes in front, you know, and the
old man he rode up and shot him down.  But he didn't git much
chance to enjoy his luck, for inside of a week our folks laid him
out."

"I reckon that old man was a coward, Buck."

"I reckon he warn't a coward.  Not by a blame' sight.  There
ain't a coward amongst them Shepherdsons -- not a one.  And there
ain't no cowards amongst the Grangerfords, either.  Why, that old
man kep' up his end in a fight one day, for a half an hour,
against three Grangerfords, and come out winner.  They was all
a-horseback; he lit off of his horse and got behind a little
wood-pile, and kep' his horse before him to stop the bullets; but
the Grangerfords staid on their horses and capered around the old
man, and peppered away at him, and he peppered away at them.  Him
and his horse both went home pretty leaky and crippled, but the
Grangerfords had to be fetched home -- and one of 'em was dead,
and another died the next day.  No, sir, if a body's out hunting
for cowards, he don't want to fool away any time amongst them
Shepherdsons, becuz they don't breed any of that kind."

Next Sunday we all went to church, about three mile, everybody
a-horseback.  The men took their guns along, so did Buck, and kept
them between their knees or stood them handy against the wall.
The Shepherdsons done the same.  It was pretty ornery preaching --
all about brotherly love, and such-like tiresomeness; but
everybody said it was a good sermon, and they all talked it over
going home, and had such a powerful lot to say about faith, and
good works and free grace, and preforeordestination, and I don't
know what all, that it did seem to me to be one of the roughest
Sundays I had run across yet.

About an hour after dinner everybody was dozing around, some
in their chairs and some in their rooms, and it got to be pretty
dull.  Buck and a dog was stretched out on the grass in the sun,
sound asleep.  I went up to our room, and judged I would take a
nap myself.  I found that sweet Miss Sophia standing in her door,
which was next to ours, and she took me in her room and shut the
door very soft, and asked me if I liked her, and I said I did; and
she asked me if I would do something for her and not tell anybody,
and I said I would.  Then she said she'd forgot her Testament, and
left it in the seat at church, between two other books and would I
slip out quiet and go there and fetch it to her, and not say
nothing to nobody.  I said I would.  So I slid out and slipped off
up the road, and there warn't anybody at the church, except maybe
a hog or two, for there warn't any lock on the door, and hogs
likes a puncheon floor in summer-time because it's cool.  If you
notice, most folks don't go to church only when they've got to;
but a hog is different.

Says I to myself something's up -- it ain't natural for a girl
to be in such a sweat about a Testament; so I give it a shake, and
out drops a little piece of paper with "Half-past two" wrote on it
with a pencil.  I ransacked it, but couldn't find anything else.
I couldn't make anything out of that, so I put the paper in the
book again, and when I got home and up stairs, there was Miss
Sophia in her door waiting for me.  She pulled me in and shut the
door; then she looked in the Testament till she found the paper,
and as soon as she read it she looked glad; and before a body
could think, she grabbed me and give me a squeeze, and said I was
the best boy in the world, and not to tell anybody.  She was
mighty red in the face, for a minute, and her eyes lighted up and
it made her powerful pretty.  I was a good deal astonished, but
when I got my breath I asked her what the paper was about, and she
asked me if I had read it, and I said no, and she asked me if I
could read writing, and I told her "no, only coarse-hand," and
then she said the paper warn't anything but a book-mark to keep
her place, and I might go and play now.

I went off down to the river, studying over this thing, and
pretty soon I notice that my nigger was following along behind.
When we was out of sight of the house, he looked back and around a
second, and then comes a-running and says:

"Mars Jawge, if you'll come down into de swamp, I'll show you
a whole stack o' water-moccasins."

Thinks I, that's mighty curious; he said that yesterday.  He
oughter know a body don't love water-moccasins enough to go around
hunting for them.  What is he up to anyway?  So I says --

"All right, trot ahead."

I followed a half a mile, then he struck out over the swamp
and waded ankle deep as much as another half mile.  We come to a
little flat piece of land which was dry and very thick with trees
and bushes and vines, and he says --

"You shove right in dah, jist a few steps, Mars Jawge, dah's
whah dey is.  I's seed 'm befo', I don't k'yer to see 'em no mo'."

Then he slopped right along and went away, and pretty soon the
trees hid him.  I poked into the place a-ways, and come to a
little open patch as big as a bedroom, all hung around with vines,
and found a man laying there asleep -- and by jings it was my old
Jim!

I waked him up, and I reckoned it was going to be a grand
surprise to him to see me again, but it warn't.  He nearly cried,
he was so glad, but he warn't surprised.  Said he swum along
behind me, that night, and heard me yell every time, but dasn't
answer, because he didn't want nobody to pick him up, and take him
into slavery again.  Says he --

"I got hurt a little, en couldn't swim fas', so I wuz a
considable ways behine you, towards de las'; when you landed I
reck'ned I could ketch up wid you on de lan' 'dout havin' to shout
at you, but when I see dat house I begin to go slow.  I 'uz off
too fur to hear what dey say to you -- I wuz 'fraid o' de dogs --
but when it 'uz all quiet agin, I knowed you's in de house, so I
struck out for de woods to wait for day.  Early in de mawnin' some
er de niggers come along, gwyne to de fields, en dey tuck me en
showed me dis place, whah de dogs can't track me on accounts o' de
water, en dey brings me truck to eat every night, en tells me how
you's a gitt'n along."

"Why didn't you tell my Jack to fetch me here sooner, Jim?"

"Well, 'twarn't no use to 'sturb you, Huck, tell we could do
sumfn -- but we's all right, now.  I ben a-buyin' pots en pans en
vittles, as I got a chanst, en a patchin' up de raf', nights,
when --"

"What raft, Jim?"

"Our ole raf'."

"You mean to say our old raft warn't smashed all to flinders?"

"No, she warn't.  She was tore up a good deal -- one en' of
her was -- but dey warn't no great harm done, on'y our traps was
mos' all los'.  Ef we hadn' dive' so deep en swum so fur under
water, en de night hadn' ben so dark, en we warn't so sk'yerd, en
ben sich punkin-heads, as de sayin' is, we'd a seed de raf'.  But
it's jis' as well we didn't, 'kase now she's all fixed up agin
mos' as good as new, en we's got a new lot o' stuff, too, in de
place o' what 'uz los'."

"Why, how did you get hold of the raft again, Jim -- did you
catch her?"

"How I gwyne to ketch her, en I out in de woods?  No, some er
de niggers foun' her ketched on a snag, along heah in de ben', en
dey hid her in a crick, 'mongst de willows, en dey wuz so much
jawin' 'bout which un 'um she b'long to de mos', dat I come to
heah 'bout it pooty soon, so I ups en settles de trouble by
tellin' 'um she don't b'long to none uv um, but to you en me; en I
ast'm if dey gwyne to grab a young white genlman's propaty, en git
a hid'n for it?  Den I gin 'm ten cents apiece, en dey 'uz mighty
well satisfied, en wisht some mo' rafs 'ud come along en make 'm
rich agin.  Dey's mighty good to me, dese niggers is, en whatever
I wants 'm to do fur me, I doan' have to ast 'm twice, honey.  Dat
Jack's a good nigger, en pooty smart."

"Yes, he is.  He ain't ever told me you was here; told me to
come, and he'd show me a lot of water-moccasins.  If anything
happens, he ain't mixed up in it.  He can say he never seen us
together, and it'll be the truth."

I don't want to talk much about the next day.  I reckon I'll
cut it pretty short.  I waked up about dawn, and was agoing to
turn over and go to sleep again, when I noticed how still it was
-- didn't seem to be anybody stirring.  That warn't usual.  Next I
notice that Buck was up and gone.  Well, I gets up, a-wondering,
and goes down stairs -- nobody around; everything as still as a
mouse.  Just the same outside; thinks I, what does it mean?  Down
by the wood-pile I comes across my Jack, and says:

"What's it all about?"

Says he:

"Don't you know, Mars Jawge?"

"No," says I, "I don't."

"Well, den, Miss Sophia's run off! 'deed she has.  She run off
in de night, sometime -- nobody don't know jis' when -- run off to
git married to dat young Harney Shepherdson, you know --
leastways, so dey 'spec.  De fambly foun' it out, 'bout half an
hour ago -- maybe a little mo' -- en I tell you dey warn't no time
los'.  Sich another hurryin' up guns en hosses you never see!  De
women folks has gone for to stir up de relations, en ole Mars Saul
en de boys tuck dey guns en rode up de river road for to try to
ketch dat young man en kill him 'fo' he kin git acrost de river
wid Miss Sophia.  I reck'n dey's gwyne to be mighty rough times."

"Buck went off 'thout waking me up."

"Well I reck'n he did!  Dey warn't gwyne to mix you up in it.
Mars Buck he loaded up his gun en 'lowed he's gwyne to fetch home
a Shepherdson or bust.  Well, dey'll be plenty un 'm dah, I
reck'n, en you bet you he'll fetch one if he gits a chanst."

I took up the river road as hard as I could put.  By-and-by I
begin to hear guns a good ways off.  When I come in sight of the
log store and the wood-pile where the steamboats lands, I worked
along under the trees and brush till I got to a good place, and
then I clumb up into the forks of a cotton-wood that was out of
reach, and watched.  There was a wood-rank four foot high, a
little ways in front of the tree, and first I was going to hide
behind that; but maybe it was luckier I didn't.

There was four or five men cavorting around on their horses in
the open place before the log store, cussing and yelling, and
trying to get at a couple of young chaps that was behind the
wood-rank alongside of the steamboat landing -- but they couldn't
come it.  Every time one of them showed himself on the river side
of the wood-pile he got shot at.  The two boys was squatting back
to back behind the pile, so they could watch both ways.

By-and-by the men stopped cavorting around and yelling.  They
started riding towards the store; then up gets one of the boys,
draws a steady bead over the wood-rank, and drops one of them out
of his saddle.  All the men jumped off of their horses and grabbed
the hurt one and started to carry him to the store; and that
minute the two boys started on the run.  They got half-way to the
tree I was in before the men noticed.  Then the men see them, and
jumped on their horses and took out after them.  They gained on
the boys, but it didn't do no good, the boys had too good a start;
they got to the wood-pile that was in front of my tree, and
slipped in behind it, and so they had the bulge on the men again.
One of the boys was Buck, and the other was a slim young chap
about nineteen years old.

The men ripped around awhile, and then rode away.  As soon as
they was out of sight, I sung out to Buck and told him.  He didn't
know what to make of my voice coming out of the tree, at first.
He was awful surprised.  He told me to watch out sharp and let him
know when the men come in sight again; said they was up to some
devilment or other -- wouldn't be gone long.  I wished I was out
of that tree, but I dasn't come down.  Buck begun to cry and rip,
and 'lowed that him and his cousin Joe (that was the other young
chap) would make up for this day, yet.  He said his father and his
two brothers was killed, and two or three of the enemy.  Said the
Shepherdsons laid for them, in ambush.  Buck said his father and
brothers ought to waited for their relations -- the Shepherdsons
was too strong for them.  I asked him what was become of young
Hamey and Miss Sophia.  He said they'd got across the river and
was safe.  I was glad of that; but the way Buck did take on
because he didn't manage to kill Harney that day he shot at him --
I hain't ever heard anything like it.

All of a sudden, bang! bang! bang! goes three or four guns --
the men had slipped around through the woods and come in from
behind without their horses!  The boys jumped for the river --
both of them hurt -- and as they swum down the current the men run
along the bank shooting at them and singing out, "Kill them, kill
them!"  It made me so sick I most fell out of the tree.  I ain't
agoing to tell all that happened -- it would make me sick again if
I was to do that.  I wished I hadn't ever come ashore that night,
to see such things.  I ain't ever going to get shut of them --
lots of times I dream about them.

I staid in the tree till it begun to get dark, afraid to come
down.  Sometimes I heard guns away off in the woods; and twice I
seen little gangs of men gallop past the log store with guns; so I
reckoned the trouble was still agoing on.  I was mighty
down-hearted; so I made up my mind I wouldn't ever go anear that
house again, because I reckoned I was to blame, somehow.  I judged
that that piece of paper meant that Miss Sophia was to meet Harney
somewheres at half-past two and run off; and I judged I ought to
told her father about the paper and the curious way she acted, and
then maybe he would a locked her up and this awful mess wouldn't
ever happened.

When I got down out of the tree, I crept along down the river
bank a piece, and found the two bodies laying in the edge of the
water, and tugged at them till I got them ashore; then I covered
up their faces, and got away as quick as I could.  I cried a
little when I was covering up Buck's face, for he was mighty good
to me.

It was just dark, now.  I never went near the house, but
struck through the woods and made for the swamp.  Jim warn't on
his island, so I tramped off in a hurry for the crick, and crowded
through the willows, red-hot to jump aboard and get out of that
awful country -- the raft was gone!  My souls, but I was scared!
I couldn't get my breath for most a minute.  Then I raised a yell.
A voice not twenty-five foot from me, says --

"Good lan'! is dat you, honey?  Doan' make no noise."

It was Jim's voice -- nothing ever sounded so good before.  I
run along the bank a piece and got aboard, and Jim he grabbed me
and hugged me, he was so glad to see me.  He says --

"Laws bless you, chile, I 'uz right down sho' you's dead agin.
Jack's been heah, he say he reck'n you's ben shot, kase you didn'
come home no mo'; so I's jes' dis minute a startin' de raft down
towards de mouf er de crick, so's to be all ready for to shove out
en leave soon as Jack comes agin en tells me for certain you is
dead.  Lawsy, I's mighty glad to git you back agin, honey."

I says --

"All right -- that's mighty good; they won't find me, and
they'll think I've been killed, and floated down the river --
there's something up there that'll help them to think so -- so
don't you lose no time, Jim, but just shove off for the big water
as fast as ever you can."

I never felt easy till the raft was two mile below there and
out in the middle of the Mississippi.  Then we hung up our signal
lantern, and judged that we was free and safe once more.  I hadn't
had a bite to eat since yesterday; so Jim he got out some
corn-dodgers and buttermilk, and pork and cabbage, and greens --
there ain't nothing in the world so good, when it's cooked right
-- and whilst I eat my supper we talked, and had a good time.  I
was powerful glad to get away from the feuds, and so was Jim to
get away from the swamp.  We said there warn't no home like a
raft, after all.  Other places do seem so cramped up and smothery,
but a raft don't.  You feel mighty free and easy and comfortable
on a raft.


Adventures of Huckleberry Finn -- Chapter XIX
Two or three days and nights went by; I reckon I might say
they swum by, they slid along so quiet and smooth and lovely.
Here is the way we put in the time.  It was a monstrous big river
down there -- sometimes a mile and a half wide; we run nights, and
laid up and hid day-times; soon as night was most gone, we stopped
navigating and tied up -- nearly always in the dead water under a
tow-head; and then cut young cottonwoods and willows and hid the
raft with them.  Then we set out the lines.  Next we slid into the
river and had a swim, so as to freshen up and cool off; then we
set down on the sandy bottom where the water was about knee deep,
and watched the daylight come.  Not a sound, anywheres --
perfectly still -- just like the whole world was asleep, only
sometimes the bull frogs a-cluttering, maybe.  The first thing to
see, looking away over the water, was a kind of dull line -- that
was the woods on t'other side -- you couldn't make nothing else
out; then a pale place in the sky; then more paleness, spreading
around; then the river softened up, away off, and warn't black any
more, but gray; you could see little dark spots drifting along,
ever so far away -- trading scows, and such things; and long black
streaks -- rafts; sometimes you could hear a sweep screaking; or
jumbled up voices, it was so still, and sounds come so far; and
by-and-by you could see a streak on the water which you know by
the look of the streak that there's a snag there in a swift
current which breaks on it and makes that streak look that way;
and you see the mist curl up off of the water, and the east
reddens up, and the river, and you make out a log cabin in the
edge of the woods, away on the bank on t'other side of the river,
being a wood-yard, likely, and piled by them cheats so you can
throw a dog through it anywheres; then the nice breeze springs up
and comes fanning you from over there, so cool and fresh, and
sweet to smell, on account of the woods and the flowers; but
sometimes not that way, because they've left dead fish laying
around, gars, and such, and they do get pretty rank; and next
you've got the full day, and everything smiling in the sun, and
the song-birds just going it!

A little smoke couldn't be noticed, now, so we would take some
fish off of the lines, and cook up a hot breakfast.  And
afterwards we would watch the lonesomeness of the river, and kind
of lazy along, and by-and-by lazy off to sleep.  Wake up,
by-and-by, and look to see what done it, and maybe see a
steamboat, coughing along up stream, so far off towards the other
side you couldn't tell nothing about her only whether she was
stern-wheel or side-wheel, then for about an hour there wouldn't
be nothing to hear nor nothing to see -- just solid lonesomeness.
Next you'd see a raft sliding by, away off yonder, and maybe a
galoot on it chopping, because they're most always doing it on a
raft; you'd see the ax flash, and come down -- you don't hear
nothing; you see that ax go up again, and by the time it's above
the man's head, then you hear the k'chunk! -- it had took all that
time to come over the water.  So we would put in the day, lazying
around, listening to the stillness.  Once there was a thick fog,
and the rafts and things that went by was beating tin pans so the
steamboats wouldn't run over them.  A scow or a raft went by so
close we could hear them talking and cussing and laughing -- heard
them plain; but we couldn't see no sign of them; it made you feel
crawly, it was like spirits carrying on that way in the air.  Jim
said he believed it was spirits; but I says:

"No, spirits wouldn't say, `dern the dern fog.'"

Soon as it was night, out we shoved; when we got her out to
about the middle, we let her alone, and let her float wherever the
current wanted her to; then we lit the pipes, and dangled our legs
in the water and talked about all kinds of things -- we was always
naked, day and night, whenever the mosquitoes would let us -- the
new clothes Buck's folks made for me was too good to be
comfortable, and besides I didn't go much on clothes, nohow.

Sometimes we'd have that whole river all to ourselves for the
longest time.  Yonder was the banks and the islands, across the
water; and maybe a spark -- which was a candle in a cabin window
-- and sometimes on the water you could see a spark or two -- on a
raft or a scow, you know; and maybe you could hear a fiddle or a
song coming over from one of them crafts.  It's lovely to live on
a raft.  We had the sky, up there, all speckled with stars, and we
used to lay on our backs and look up at them, and discuss about
whether they was made, or only just happened -- Jim he allowed
they was made, but I allowed they happened; I judged it would have
took too long to make so many.  Jim said the moon could a laid
them; well, that looked kind of reasonable, so I didn't say
nothing against it, because I've seen a frog lay most as many, so
of course it could be done.  We used to watch the stars that fell,
too, and see them streak down.  Jim allowed they'd got spoiled and
was hove out of the nest.

Once or twice of a night we would see a steamboat slipping
along in the dark, and now and then she would belch a whole world
of sparks up out of her chimbleys, and they would rain down in the
river and look awful pretty; then she would turn a corner and her
lights would wink out and her pow-wow shut off and leave the river
still again; and by-and-by her waves would get to us, a long time
after she was gone, and joggle the raft a bit, and after that you
wouldn't hear nothing for you couldn't tell how long, except maybe
frogs or something.

After midnight the people on shore went to bed, and then for
two or three hours the shores was black -- no more sparks in the
cabin windows.  These sparks was our clock -- the first one that
showed again meant morning was coming, so we hunted a place to
hide and tie up, right away.

One morning about day-break, I found a canoe and crossed over
a chute to the main shore -- it was only two hundred yards -- and
paddled about a mile up a crick amongst the cypress woods, to see
if I couldn't get some berries.  Just as I was passing a place
where a kind of a cow-path crossed the crick, here comes a couple
of men tearing up the path as tight as they could foot it.  I
thought I was a goner, for whenever anybody was after anybody I
judged it was me -- or maybe Jim.  I was about to dig out from
there in a hurry, but they was pretty close to me then, and sung
out and begged me to save their lives -- said they hadn't been
doing nothing, and was being chased for it -- said there was men
and dogs a-coming.  They wanted to jump right in, but I says --

"Don't you do it.  I don't hear the dogs and horses yet;
you've got time to crowd through the brush and get up the crick a
little ways; then you take to the water and wade down to me and
get in -- that'll throw the dogs off the scent."

They done it, and soon as they was aboard I lit out for our
tow-head, and in about five or ten minutes we heard the dogs and
the men away off, shouting.  We heard them come along towards the
crick, but couldn't see them; they seemed to stop and fool around
a while; then, as we got further and further away all the time, we
couldn't hardly hear them at all; by the time we had left a mile
of woods behind us and struck the river, everything was quiet, and
we paddled over to the tow-head and hid in the cotton-woods and
was safe.

One of these fellows was about seventy, or upwards, and had a
bald head and very gray whiskers.  He had an old battered-up
slouch hat on, and a greasy blue woolen shirt, and ragged old blue
jeans britches stuffed into his boot tops, and home-knit
galluses -- no, he only had one.  He had an old long-tailed blue
jeans coat with slick brass buttons, flung over his arm, and both
of them had big fat ratty-looking carpet-bags.

The other fellow was about thirty and dressed about as ornery.
After breakfast we all laid off and talked, and the first thing
that come out was that these chaps didn't know one another.

"What got you into trouble?" says the baldhead to t'other
chap.

"Well, I'd been selling an article to take the tartar off the
teeth -- and it does take it off, too, and generly the enamel
along with it -- but I staid about one night longer than I ought
to, and was just in the act of sliding out when I ran across you
on the trail this side of town, and you told me they were coming,
and begged me to help you to get off.  So I told you I was
expecting trouble myself and would scatter out with you.  That's
the whole yarn -- what's yourn?"

"Well, I'd ben a-runnin' a little temperance revival thar,
'bout a week, and was the pet of the women-folks, big and little,
for I was makin' it mighty warm for the rummies, I tell you, and
takin' as much as five or six dollars a night -- ten cents a head,
children and niggers free -- and business a growin' all the time;
when somehow or another a little report got around, last night,
that I had a way of puttin' in my time with a private jug, on the
sly.  A nigger rousted me out this mornin', and told me the people
was getherin' on the quiet, with their dogs and horses, and they'd
be along pretty soon and give me 'bout half an hour's start, and
then run me down, if they could; and if they got me they'd tar and
feather me and ride me on a rail, sure.  I didn't wait for no
breakfast -- I warn't hungry."

"Old man," says the young one, "I reckon we might double-team
it together; what do you think?"

"I ain't undisposed.  What's your line -- mainly?"

"Jour printer, by trade; do a little in patent medicines;
theatre-actor -- tragedy, you know; take a turn at mesmerism and
phrenology when there's a chance; teach singing-geography school
for a change; sling a lecture, sometimes -- oh, I do lots of
things -- most anything that comes handy, so it ain't work.
What's your lay?"

"I've done considerble in the doctoring way in my time.
Layin' on o' hands is my best holt -- for cancer, and paralysis,
and sich things; and I k'n tell a fortune pretty good, when I've
got somebody along to find out the facts for me.  Preachin's my
line, too; and workin' camp-meetin's; and missionaryin' around."

Nobody never said anything for a while; then the young man
hove a sigh and says --

"Alas!"

"What're you alassin' about?" says the baldhead.

"To think I should have lived to be leading such a life, and
be degraded down into such company."  And he begun to wipe the
corner of his eye with a rag.

"Dern your skin, ain't the company good enough for you?" says
the baldhead, pretty pert and uppish.

"Yes, it is good enough for me; it's as good as I deserve; for
who fetched me so low, when I was so high?  I did myself.  I don't
blame you, gentlemen -- far from it; I don't blame anybody.  I
deserve it all.  Let the cold world do its worst; one thing I know
-- there's a grave somewhere for me.  The world may go on just as
its always done, and take everything from me -- loved ones,
property, everything -- but it can't take that.  Some day I'll lie
down in it and forget it all, and my poor broken heart will be at
rest."  He went on a-wiping.

"Drot your pore broken heart," says the baldhead; "what are
you heaving your pore broken heart at us f'r?  We hain't done
nothing."

"No, I know you haven't.  I ain't blaming you, gentlemen.  I
brought myself down -- yes, I did it myself.  It's right I should
suffer -- perfectly right -- I don't make any moan."

"Brought you down from whar?  Whar was you brought down from?"

"Ah, you would not believe me; the world never believes -- let
it pass -- 'tis no matter.  The secret of my birth --"

"The secret of your birth?  Do you mean to say --"

"Gentlemen," says the young man, very solemn, "I will reveal
it to you, for I feel I may have confidence in you.  By rights I
am a duke!"

Jim's eyes bugged out when he heard that; and I reckon mine
did, too.  Then the baldhead says: "No! you can't mean it?"

"Yes.  My great-grandfather, eldest son of the Duke of
Bridgewater, fled to this country about the end of the last
century, to breathe the pure air of freedom; married here, and
died, leaving a son, his own father dying about the same time.
The second son of the late duke seized the title and estates --
the infant real duke was ignored.  I am the lineal descendant of
that infant -- I am the rightful Duke of Bridgewater; and here am
I, forlorn, torn from my high estate, hunted of men, despised by
the cold world, ragged, worn, heart-broken, and degraded to the
companionship of felons on a raft!"

Jim pitied him ever so much, and so did I.  We tried to
comfort him, but he said it warn't much use, he couldn't be much
comforted; said if we was a mind to acknowledge him, that would do
him more good than most anything else; so we said we would, if he
would tell us how.  He said we ought to bow, when we spoke to him,
and say "Your Grace," or "My Lord," or "Your Lordship" -- and he
wouldn't mind it if we called him plain "Bridgewater," which he
said was a title, anyway, and not a name; and one of us ought to
wait on him at dinner, and do any little thing for him he wanted
done.

Well, that was all easy, so we done it.  All through dinner
Jim stood around and waited on him, and says, "Will yo' Grace have
some o' dis, or some o' dat?" and so on, and a body could see it
was mighty pleasing to him.

But the old man got pretty silent, by-and-by -- didn't have
much to say and didn't look pretty comfortable over all that
petting that was going on around that duke.  He seemed to have
something on his mind.  So, along in the afternoon, he says:

"Looky here, Bilgewater," he says, "I'm nation sorry for you,
but you ain't the only person that's had troubles like that."

"No?"

"No, you ain't.  You ain't the only person that's ben snaked
down wrongfully out'n a high place."

"Alas!"

"No, you ain't the only person that's had a secret of his
birth."  And by jings, he begins to cry.

"Hold!  What do you mean?"

"Bilgewater, kin I trust you?" says the old man, still sort of
sobbing.

"To the bitter death!"  He took the old man by the hand and
squeezed it, and says, "The secret of your being: speak!"

"Bilgewater, I am the late Dauphin!"

You bet you Jim and me stared, this time.  Then the duke says:

"You are what?"

"Yes, my friend, it is too true -- your eyes is lookin' at
this very moment on the pore disappeared Dauphin, Looy the
Seventeen, son of Looy the Sixteen and Marry Antonette."

"You!  At your age!  No!  You mean you're the late
Charlemagne; you must be six or seven hundred years old, at the
very least."

"Trouble has done it, Bilgewater, trouble has done it; trouble
has brung these gray hairs and this premature balditude.  Yes,
gentlemen, you see before you, in blue jeans and misery, the
wanderin', exiled, trampled-on and sufferin' rightful King of
France."

Well, he cried and took on so, that me and Jim didn't know
hardly what to do, we was so sorry -- and so glad and proud we'd
got him with us, too.  So we set in, like we done before with the
duke, and tried to comfort him.  But he said it warn't no use,
nothing but to be dead and done with it all could do him any good;
though he said it often made him feel easier and better for a
while if people treated him according to his rights, and got down
on one knee to speak to him, and always called him "Your Majesty,"
and waited on him first at meals, and didn't set down in his
presence till he asked them.  So Jim and me set to majestying him,
and doing this and that and t'other for him, and standing up till
he told us we might set down.  This done him heaps of good, and so
he got cheerful and comfortable.  But the duke kind of soured on
him, and didn't look a bit satisfied with the way things was
going; still, the king acted real friendly towards him, and said
the duke's great-grandfather and all the other Dukes of Bilgewater
was a good deal thought of by his father and was allowed to come
to the palace considerable; but the duke staid huffy a good while,
till by-and-by the king says:

"Like as not we got to be together a blamed long time, on this
h-yer raft, Bilgewater, and so what's the use o' your bein' sour?
It'll only make things oncomfortable.  It ain't my fault I warn't
born a duke, it ain't your fault you warn't born a king -- so
what's the use to worry?  Make the best o' things the way you find
'em, says I -- that's my motto.  This ain't no bad thing that
we've struck here -- plenty grub and an easy life -- come, give us
your hand, Duke, and less all be friends."

The duke done it, and Jim and me was pretty glad to see it.
It took away all the uncomfortableness, and we felt mighty good
over it, because it would a been a miserable business to have any
unfriendliness on the raft; for what you want, above all things,
on a raft, is for everybody to be satisfied, and feel right and
kind towards the others.

It didn't take me long to make up my mind that these liars
warn't no kings nor dukes, at all, but just low-down humbugs and
frauds.  But I never said nothing, never let on; kept it to
myself; it's the best way; then you don't have no quarrels, and
don't get into no trouble.  If they wanted us to call them kings
and dukes, I hadn't no objections, 'long as it would keep peace in
the family; and it warn't no use to tell Jim, so I didn't tell
him.  If I never learnt nothing else out of pap, I learnt that the
best way to get along with his kind of people is to let them have
their own way.